Station 100- Video consultation
Patient’s name: Samira Begum
Age: 28-year-old female
Past medical history
• None recorded
• Newly registered at the practice
Drug and Allergy History:
• Not on any medication
• No Known Drug Allergy
Recent consultation
• No significant recent consultation
Reason for consultation: Patient booked a routine video consultation to discuss
concerns.
Patient’s story (Role player’s Brief)
You are Samira Begum, a 29-year-old female. You have been experiencing a
persistent cough for the past 7 weeks. The cough is dry most of the time, but
occasionally you notice streaks of blood when you cough.
You’ve also lost weight recently (about 5 kg) and experience night sweats and fever
that make you wake up feeling drenched. You feel fatigued. These symptoms are
starting to interfere with your work and social life.
You’re embarrassed by your persistent cough, as it often occurs during meetings at
work. You’re worried about what could be causing these symptoms, especially lung
cancer, as you know someone who had similar symptoms and was diagnosed with it.
You’re hoping to find answers and a plan to address these symptoms.
SAY NO TO ANY OTHER SYMPTOMS ASKED
Social History: Born in Bangladesh; moved to the UK 2 years ago for a career in
tech. You worked in a factory where they manufacture building and plumbing
materials
Non-smoker, does not drink alcohol.
Lives in a shared flat with colleagues.

-- 531 of 1282 --

530
You were not vaccinated against TB
Ideas: You’re concerned about lung cancer due to the haemoptysis and weight loss.
Concerns: You’re worried about the social embarrassment from your cough at work
and anxious about a potentially serious diagnosis like cancer.
Expectations: You'd like the doctor to investigate what’s causing these symptoms
and guide you on what steps to take next.
Questions for the doctor?
Could your exposure to silica from the building? Can I still go to work?
Marking scheme
History
• Ask about cough onset
• Ask if productive
• Ask about haemoptysis
• Ask about associated symptoms-wheeze fever, SOB, chest pain, palpitations
• Ask about precipitating factors
• Ask if worse at night
• Ask if there are contact with persons with cough or TB
• Ask if she was born outside the UK
• Ask if she was vaccinated against TB
• Ask about flu-like symptoms/Postnasal drip—blocked nose, runny nose,
feeling of mucus at back of throat
• Ask about reflux symptoms- heart burn, sour taste in tongue
• Ask about hoarse voice
• Ask about red flag cancer symptoms--weight loss, night sweats, loss of
appetite, fatigue
• Ask about smoking history –if patient says NO, ask if patient has ever smoked
or exposed to smoke
• Ask about occupation and if there is any stress or if cough happens mostly at
work

-- 532 of 1282 --

531
• Ask about any allergies
• Ask ICE
• Give diagnosis of possible TB
"Samira, I can see why you’re concerned about your symptoms, especially
with your history of working in a factory in Bangladesh and your worry about
cancer. Let me explain a bit about what might be going on.
Your persistent cough, weight loss, and night sweats could be caused by
tuberculosis (TB), which is a bacterial infection that affects the lungs. TB is
still relatively common in Bangladesh, and it’s something we should
investigate. Your work in the factory may have exposed you to silica dust,
which can increase the risk of lung problems, including TB. Silica exposure
can weaken the lungs, making them more vulnerable to infections like TB, and
in rare cases, it can also increase the risk of other lung conditions.
I also understand your concern about cancer, especially with the coughing up
blood. While lung cancer is less likely at your age and with no smoking
history, it’s important to take your symptoms seriously and rule out any
serious conditions.
There are other possible causes for your symptoms, like chronic infections or
non-cancerous lung diseases, so the next step will be to run some tests, such
as a chest X-ray and sputum tests, to find out what’s going on and guide the
right treatment."
Management
• Offer F2F to assess and listen to chest
• Offer urgent sputum culture for routine screen and TB, also offer blood test—
FBC, ESR, CRP, U+ E’s
• Offer urgent Chest Xray
• Inform her that as TB is suspected, she will be referred urgently to a
respiratory specialist as well who will confirm this diagnosis
• Advice that if TB is confirmed, she will be given antibiotics for about 6 months
to eradicate it
• Advice that TB is spread from person to person through the air when
someone with active TB in their lungs coughs, sneezes, or even talks. The

-- 533 of 1282 --

532
bacteria can become airborne and be inhaled by people nearby. If she is
confirmed to have TB, public health officials will be informed and they will try
to find closed contacts as they will need to be tested and treated if they are
found to have it.
• Advice on preventive measures in the interim- to put on protective mask,
cover mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing, and dispose of sputum
and used tissues properly, good hand hygiene.
• Advice to avoid enclosed public spaces and other areas where people gather
for now until diagnosis and further advice has been sort from specialist. This
will mean she may need to avoid work. Sick note can be given
• Safety Netting: Explain that if she notices increased blood in her cough,
significant chest pain, or breathlessness, she should seek medical attention
urgently.

-- 534 of 1282 --

533
Station 101- Telephone consultation
Patient’s name: Justina Coleman
Age: 28-year-old female
Past medical history
• None Recorded
Drug and Allergy History
• Not currently on any medication
• No Known Drug Allergy
Recent consultation
• No significant recent consultations
Patient booked routine telephone consultation to discuss concerns.
Patient’s Story (Role Player’s Brief)
You are Justina Coleman, a 28-year-old female.
Opening Statement: Hi doctor, I am calling because I keep having problems with
my hands. They sometimes change colour and it has been getting worse.
If Asked to Explain Further:
You have booked this appointment because you have noticed problems with your
hands for about 4 years, but they have become worse in the last 6 months. Your
hands first go white, then turn blue, and finally red. When your hands are white or
blue, they feel numb. When they turn red, they become painful.
You have realised that the episodes tend to occur when you play the clarinet. You
usually have to stop playing, and the symptoms settle after about 15 minutes.
You are a professional musician and play the clarinet at special events such as
weddings and exclusive dinners.
Social History: You smoke around 15 cigarettes per day and have done so for the
last 5 years. You live with your partner. You do not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs.
Family History: Unknown, as you were adopted.
Ideas: You are unsure what this condition might be.
Concerns: You have an important show on a big stage in 4 weeks and worry this
problem will affect your performance.

-- 535 of 1282 --

534
Expectations: You would like advice on what this could be and what can be done to
help manage it.
Role-player instruction:
If the doctor offers you a face-to-face appointment to examine your hands, ask:
“What will this change, since I do not have the symptoms now and this only happens
when I play the clarinet?”
Say NO to any other questions/symptoms outside of the details already provided in
the scenario. Accept anything offered to you by the doctor.
Marking Scheme
Data Gathering and Diagnosis
• Ask about onset and duration of symptoms
• Ask if symptoms affect both hands or just one.
• Ask about colour changes in the fingers (white, blue, red) and how long it
takes to return to normal
• Ask if there is associated pain in the hands or fingers during an episode
• Ask about abnormal sensations such as tingling, numbness, or pins and
needles
• Ask about known triggers such as cold exposure, repetitive finger use (e.g.
clarinet playing in the above patient), emotional stress, or vibrating tools
• Ask if other areas such as nose tip, earlobes, tongue, or nipples are affected
• Ask about any ulcers on the fingers or thickening/tightening of the skin
(sclerodactyly), which may suggest secondary Raynaud’s
• Ask about weakness or reduced grip strength in the hands
• Ask about itchiness, red or purple lesions with swelling on the fingers after
cold exposure, which may suggest chilblains. Please note: Chilblains are
usually triggered by cold alone. Raynaud’s, on the other hand, can be
triggered not only by cold but also by stress, vibrating tools, or repetitive finger
use.
• Ask about symptoms of CREST syndrome — a limited form of systemic
sclerosis: Calcinosis (hard lumps under the skin), Raynaud’s phenomenon,
Oesophageal dysmotility (difficulty swallowing), Sclerodactyly (tightening
of the skin on fingers), and Telangiectasia (visible small blood vessels on the
skin).
• Ask about the impact of