

-- 1 of 575 --

Second Edition
The
Complete MRCGP
Casebook
100 Consultations for the RCA/CSA
across the NEW 2020
RCGP Curriculum
NEW

-- 2 of 575 --



-- 3 of 575 --

Second Edition
The
Complete MRCGP
Casebook
100 Consultations for the RCA/CSA
across the NEW 2020
RCGP Curriculum
NEW
Emily Blount • Helen Kirby-Blount • Liz Moulton
Boca Raton London New York
CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

-- 4 of 575 --

2nd edition published 2022
by CRC Press
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
and by CRC Press
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2022 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
First edition published by CRC Press 2017
CRC Press is an imprint of Informa UK Limited
Te right of Emily Blount, Helen Kirby-Blount, and Liz Moulton to be identifed as authors of this work has been asserted by them in
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Tis book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable eforts have been made to
publish reliable data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors
or omissions that may be made. Te publishers wish to make clear that any views or opinions expressed in this book by individual editors,
authors or contributors are personal to them and do not necessarily refect the views/opinions of the publishers. Te information or
guidance contained in this book is intended for use by medical, scientifc or health-care professionals and is provided strictly as a sup-
plement to the medical or other professional’s own judgement, their knowledge of the patient’s medical history, relevant manufacturer’s
instructions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances in medical science, any information or advice
on dosages, procedures or diagnoses should be independently verifed. Te reader is strongly urged to consult the relevant national drug
formulary and the drug companies’ and device or material manufacturers’ printed instructions, and their websites, before administering
or utilizing any of the drugs, devices or materials mentioned in this book. Tis book does not indicate whether a particular treatment
is appropriate or suitable for a particular individual. Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to make his or
her own professional judgements, so as to advise and treat patients appropriately. Te authors and publishers have also attempted to
trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in
this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify
in any future reprint.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or
other means, now known or hereafer invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact
mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identifcation and
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 9780367627669 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781003110729 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003110729
Typeset in Minion Pro
by Evolution Design & Digital Ltd (Kent)

-- 5 of 575 --

➠
Dedication
Tis book is dedicated to our wonderful family, the many children that have appeared in our lives since
we began writing the frst edition and our cherished friends who know who they are. We thank you for all
your love and devoted support.

-- 6 of 575 --



-- 7 of 575 --

➠ vii
Contents
Preface 	ix
Acknowledgements 	x
Author Biographies 	xi
The Complete MRCGP Casebook 	xiii
Chapter 1 	Consultation Skills and Preparing for the RCGP Exam
1A 	Introduction and How to Use the Book 	1
1B 	Useful Summaries 	3
RCGP Curriculum 	3
RCGP Capabilities 	4
Consultation Models 	6
1C 	Skills Required for This Exam and Marking Those Skills 	11
FOCUS Consultation Model 	11
ICE, SummarICE and InCludE 	15
Practising the Skills within FOCUS 	17
How to Demonstrate Skills: The Marking Scheme Made Easy 	19
Easy-to-Use Generic Feedback Card 	20
1D 	Our Useful Tips 	22
Structure and Time Management 	22
How to achieve a 10–12-minute consultation 	22
How to develop your time management skills 	22
Signposting 	23
Managing the consultation with multiple problems 	23
Structuring management plans 	24
Demonstrating Interpersonal Skills 	25
Softening and normalising 	25
How the patient should feel when they leave the consultation 	25
Child consultation 	25
Connection and empathy 	25
A useful approach to elicit the psychosocial context 	25
Avoiding assumptions 	26
Detecting and responding to verbal cues 	26
Explanations of grey areas 	26
Examinations 	27
Examination advice for the RCA 	27
How to describe a proposed examination during a telephone
consultation 	27
Patients Returning for Test Results 	28
Vulnerable Patients 	29
COVID-19 	29
Phrasing Your Questions 	30
Jargon Switch 	32
Resitting the Exam 	33
1E 	Recorded Consultation Assessment 	34
Nuts and Bolts for RCA 	34

-- 8 of 575 --

Case Selection and Demonstrating Skills of Managing Complexity 	35
The RCA Mark Scheme 	37
Abbreviations 	40
Disclaimer 	45
Chapters 2–21 	100 Cases, Aligned to the NEW 2020 RCGP Curriculum, Clinical and
Life Stages Topics
2 	Allergy and Immunology 	47
3 	Cardiovascular Health 	71
4 	Dermatology 	97
5 	ENT, Speech and Hearing 	119
6 	Eyes and Vision 	143
7 	Gastroenterology 	167
8 	Genomic Medicine 	191
9 	Gynaecology and Breast 	217
10 	Haematology 	243
11 	Infectious Disease and Travel Health 	267
12 	Kidney and Urology 	289
13 	Mental Health 	315
14 	Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology 	337
15 	Musculoskeletal Health 	361
16 	Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability 	383
17 	Neurology 	407
18 	Population Health: Promoting Health and Preventing Disease 	429
19 	Respiratory Health 	457
20 	Sexual Health 	481
21 	Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse 	505
Chapter 22 	Examination Checklists
Informed Consent 	527
Cardiovascular 	528
Respiratory 	529
Abdominal 	530
Cranial Nerves 	531
Neurological 	532
Thyroid/Neck 	533
Shoulder/Cervical Spine 	534
Elbow 	535
Hands/Wrists 	536
Hips/Lumbar Spine 	537
Knee 	538
Foot/Ankle 	539
ENT 	540
Peripheral Vascular 	541
Appendix 1: Mandatory Cases for the RCA 	543
Appendix 2: Useful Resources 	547
Index 	549
➠ viii

-- 9 of 575 --

➠ ix
Preface
Te Complete MRCGP Casebook will help you with your exam preparation whether you are submitting
recorded consultations, or preparing for a simulated surgery, or a mixture of both. We provide examples of
how to demonstrate skills in 100 cases across the new RCGP curriculum within the exam marking scheme.
Te example consultations may give you ideas on how to develop your consultation skills and meet the
challenge of managing the presenting problem safely and efectively within 10–12 minutes. Our Learning
Points provide a summary of guidance or a discussion around the topic.
Te challenge of the RCGP clinical and consultation skills exam is to be able to synthesise 10 years of med-
ical education competently, sensitively, quickly and safely, to manage any medical problem presented by
any patient who walks through the door or picks up the phone. Tis is also the challenge faced every day
by busy GPs in clinical practice. To help show you what can be achieved, the Casebook breaks down the
consultation into elements; important building blocks of the consultation which encourage demonstration
of all the skills across the marking domains.
Te more you practise these skills, the more likely it is that they will, both consciously and unconsciously,
become an integral part of your consultation toolkit. When under exam pressure, remember that these
elements are grouped into our FOCUS Consultation Model, an easy to remember acronym.
Whatever consultation model(s) you use, we strongly advise that you use your own style for authenticity,
have a fuid approach and adapt to meet the needs of each individual consultation. When you meet a new
acquaintance or a friend in any setting, demonstrating courtesy and respect for that person and showing a
genuine curiosity and interest in their life will enable rapport, storytelling and conversation to come natu-
rally – there is no need to follow a rigid formula.
We appreciate that some readers may have specialist knowledge in particular areas and may well approach
some problems diferently. Te authors are conscientious generalists and this is refected in our approach
to the cases. We hope you fnd our example consultations helpful – but would remind you that there are
many ways to deliver a good consultation, and to pass your fnal RCGP assessment!
Te Learning Points for each case also extract information from the relevant resources or guidance, and we
strongly advise always referring to the full text of the most up-to-date guidelines.
See our website www.completeMRCGP.co.uk for the Link Hub and further resources. Look out for dates
for exam preparation courses created and run by the authors and examiners.
You may also wish to look at Te Naked Consultation: A Practical Guide to Primary Care Consultation
Skills which will help you develop and hone your consultation skills further.
When role playing cases, we encourage the doctor to remember this:
‘Common things are common … But what mustn’t I miss?’
Finally, the responsibility of making frequent and fast decisions while holding risk, the urge to always get
it right (with the fear of getting it wrong), the pressure to not waste NHS resources, whilst managing com-
plexity, with a high patient load and the medico-legal need to document it all within too little time can feel
overwhelming. However, take every opportunity to remember your own loved ones and just do your best
for the person looking to you for help. Keep faith in general practice and remember the unique, professional
and supportive work ethos we share.
We wish you all the best.
Emily, Helen and Liz

-- 10 of 575 --

Acknowledgements
Dr Rachel Ruddock, Dr Richard Wood, Dr Ros Lloyd-Rout and Dr Lynnette Peterson who helped to brain-
storm this book and whose voices and wise words are hidden within.
➠ x

-- 11 of 575 --

➠ xi
Author Biographies
Dr Emily Blount
MBBS (merit) DRCOG DFSRH MRCGP
Emily graduated from Newcastle University in 2008. Afer working in Auckland,
New Zealand, she completed the Oxford GP training scheme and CSA exam in
2014, scoring in the top 3% of candidates. Emily is a GP in Oxford, an Oxford
GP Training Programme Director, a GP facilitator at Oxford’s ‘Dragon’s Den’
workshops, an Examiner for GP Recruitment, a GP Appraiser and, above all, a
mother of two children.
Dr Helen Kirby-Blount
MB ChB (hons) DRCOG MRCGP PGCME
Helen graduated from Manchester University in 2009. She is a GP partner
and trainer in Retford and a Training Programme Director for Doncaster and
Bassetlaw scheme. She sat the CSA exam in 2013 and facilitates teaching sessions
for the RCGP consultation skills exams for her local GP trainees and trainers
in Health Education England (HEE) Yorkshire and Humber. Helen created the
FOCUS Consultation Model. In her ‘spare time’ she is a busy mother to her two
daughters and loves all things ‘sport’.
Dr Liz Moulton
MBE MB ChB DRCOG FRCGP MMEd (distinction)
A GP trainer for 30 years, with a wealth of experience of preparing candidates
for the MRCGP, Liz has also undertaken most roles within HEE Yorkshire and
Humber and was Deputy Director of Postgraduate GP Education. Liz was a GP
advisor to Leeds Health Authority and to the Department of Health. She currently
works as a freelance GP and appraiser as well as working for the RCGP practice
support unit. Liz is the author of Te Naked Consultation.

-- 12 of 575 --



-- 13 of 575 --

➠ xiii
The Complete MRCGP Casebook
100 cases covering all the RCGP 2020 clinical curriculum topics
100 cases
• 	100 paired role play cards so no need to pass around a book!
• 	Seamlessly aligned with the new 2020 RCGP curriculum.
• 	Five cases for each module of the curriculum.
• 	Includes even the ‘difcult’ modules: neurodevelopmental and genomic medicine cases.
• 	Helps build confdence that you are on the right track.
Example answers
• 	For every case.
• 	Example consultations written in prose, word for word – how we would do it.
• 	See how it can be done… in 10–12 minutes!
• 	How to give quick and jargon-free explanations.
Easy-to-use generic feedback cards
• 	Marking schemes can be hard to follow if you are not a trained examiner. We have a single easy-to-use
marking scheme and tick lists for each consultation example.
Guideline summaries
• 	For every case.
• 	Revision cards and up-to-date guidelines.
• 	Including useful information and web links we have collected.
The web links will be stored and updated at the Link Hub on CompleteMRCGP.co.uk
The treasure chest symbol means there is relevant information on the Link Hub.
The ring binder
• 	Colour-coded RCGP Curriculum Modules.
• 	Easy-to-use ring binder.
• 	Helps you remain organised and keep the cases in order.
Helpful advice
• 	Tips based on our experience of the RCGP Consultation Skills exams – CSA and RCA.
• 	A summary of consultation models.
• 	Useful phrases and jargon switch.
Physical examination cards
• 	Stepwise guides to slick and thorough examinations.
• 	Realistic times suggested.
Complete MRCGP’s FOCUS Consultation Model
• 	A consultation model created specifcally for the RCA and CSA – practical, straightforward and easy to
remember under stress.
• 	Written by three experienced GP educators – two of whom sat the CSA.

-- 14 of 575 --

Whether your exam involves submitting recorded cases (RCA) or simulated patients (CSA), Te Complete
MRCGP Casebook provides examples of HOW to overcome the challenges and demonstrate competence
throughout the marking domains for all mandatory cases and across the curriculum. For every case
we provide ‘Example Consultations’ to demonstrate how each challenge could be achieved within
10–12 minutes as well as ‘Learning Points’, which summarise up-to-date guidance. All RCGP Curriculum
Modules are colour coded, helping you to keep the cases in order and stay organised.
Our FOCUS Consultation Model was created specifcally for the RCGP clinical skills exam, to focus your
skills, provide structure and give you an easy-to-use tool to help you ‘mark’ your own consultations.
Te authors are three experienced GP educators who have run CSA and RCA courses for many years,
working in collaboration with senior RCGP examiners. We have systematically condensed our experience
into this comprehensive Casebook to help you complete your GP training and become a confdent and
independent practitioner.
➠ xiv

-- 15 of 575 --

➠ 1
CHAPTER 1A INTRODUCTION
How to Use the Book
Te CSA was replaced by the RCA in 2020 and a ‘hybrid’ exam is expected. However, the principles of what
you need to evidence will remain the same:
• 	You will need to demonstrate that you can perform well in a range of cases across the breadth of the
curriculum.
• 	You will need to demonstrate data gathering, clinical management and interpersonal skills.
• 	You must perform at the level of a UK independent GP.
We have organised a selection of core cases into 20 modules, fully aligned to the new RCGP curriculum.
We recommend that some cases are specifcally performed face-to-face (symbol in the corner of the page).
However, for most cases throughout the book you have the option to decide for yourself whether you practise
the case as a telephone call, video call, face-to-face or home visit. If there is the potential for an examination,
we have written examination fndings.
You could work through the book alone; however, we recommend using the book in groups of two or three,
taking the parts of: a doctor, a patient and an ‘examiner’. Te more frequently you practise the consultation
skills that you hope to demonstrate in your exam, the more likely you are to be able to use them fuently
when under pressure.
Each case has one card for the Doctor (Doctor’s Notes) and another card for the Patient (Patient’s Story).
Once you’ve completed your consultation, turn your cards over to fnd our suggested Example Consultation
and Learning Points, which cover the important facts or guidelines relevant to the case.
Where we have extracted Learning Points from NICE or other sources, always refer to the latest version
of the full guidance – and please remember that this is only applicable to UK patients.
When a medication is mentioned, always refer to the BNF.
Instructions for the patient 	Te Presenting Complaint (PC) is the ‘opening gambit’. You should freely
give the doctor anything in quotation marks. Further information should
be given only if the doctor asks relevant questions.
Instructions for the doctor 	We suggest using our FOCUS Model, which has been broken down into
elements on each Example Consultation, as a guide. Include all these ele-
ments and you have an excellent consultation; but be fexible, so that the
consultation is conversational.
Instructions for the examiner 	Mark the Giving Feedback Card. We have also provided tick boxes on
or time keeper 	each Example Consultation page. Te examination clock starts following,
if required, identifcation and consent, that is from the moment the doctor
asks their frst question, for example ‘How can I help?’

-- 16 of 575 --

How to Use the Book
Clinical Examinations
We provide examination fndings should you choose the face-to-face option.
Constructive criticism is essential
Be honest and agree to the rules before you start! For marking, you can use:
• 	the RCGP marking criteria – see ‘How to Demonstrate Skills: Te Marking Scheme Made Easy’.
• 	the Generic Feedback card.
• 	the ‘tick boxes’ within the Example Consultations.
Useful information and web links will be stored and updated at the Link Hub on CompleteMRCGP.co.uk.
Te treasure chest symbol means there is relevant information on the Link Hub.
Symbols in the Book
Face-to-Face
See the Link Hub
➠ 2

-- 17 of 575 --

➠ 3
CHAPTER 1B USEFUL SUMMARIES
RCGP Curriculum
Te RCGP defnes and describes the GP curriculum – the competencies and capabilities that you need to
develop (and evidence!) to become an efective and safe GP. Te curriculum can be found on the RCGP
website, but we describe it here for convenience and to explain which areas are tested by the exam and are
therefore particularly relevant to this book.
Te RCGP core statement ‘Being a general practitioner’ is divided into fve areas of capability and each of
these is subdivided, so there are 13 specifc areas of capability for general practice:
1. Knowing yourself and relating to others
a. 	Fitness to practise
b. Maintaining an ethical approach
c. 	Communication and consultation
2. Applying clinical knowledge and skill
a. 	Data gathering and interpretation
b. Clinical examination and procedural skills
c. 	Making decisions
d. Clinical management
3. Managing complex and long-term care
a. 	Managing medical complexity
b. Working with colleagues and in teams
4. Working well in organisations and systems of care
a. 	Improving performance, learning and teaching
b. Organisation, management and leadership
5. Caring for the whole person and wider community
a. 	Practising holistically and promoting health and safeguarding
b. Community orientation
Te RCGP website gives detailed descriptions and explanations of each of these areas and can be accessed
at: https://www.rcgp.org.uk/training-exams/training/gp-curriculum-new/being-a-general-practitioner/
how-the-curriculum-is-structured.aspx
As well as capabilities, six professional modules are listed:
A. Consulting in general practice
B. Equality, diversity and inclusion
C. Evidence-based practice, research and sharing knowledge
D. Improving quality, safety and prescribing
E. Leadership and management
F. Urgent and unscheduled care
Ten there are 20 clinical modules, and these form the main content of this book, with fve cases illustrating
each. However, as well as assessing your clinical knowledge in these areas, the fnal consultation skills exam
tests your ability to apply many, although not quite all, of the above capabilities. Te remaining areas are
tested through the AKT and the various tools of workplace-based assessment.

-- 18 of 575 --

RCGP Capabilities
Te marking scheme for the exam relates to the RCGP capabilities – see how they ft into data gathering/
technical assessment skills, clinical management and interpersonal skills. Another way to analyse your
consultation is to ask yourself which capability you demonstrated.
1. Fitness to practise
Develop the attitudes and behaviours expected of a good doctor
2. Maintaining an ethical approach
Treat others fairly and with respect, acting without discrimination
Provide care with compassion and kindness
3. 	Communication and consultation
Establish an efective partnership with patients
Maintain a continuing relationship with patients, carers and families
4. Data gathering and interpretation
Apply a structured approach to data gathering and investigation
Interpret fndings accurately to make a diagnosis
5. Clinical examination and procedural skills
Demonstrate a profcient approach to clinical examination
Demonstrate a profcient approach to the performance of procedures
6. Making a diagnosis/decision
Adopt appropriate decision-making principles
Apply a scientifc and evidence-based approach
7. 	Clinical management
Provide general clinical care to patients of all ages and backgrounds
Adopt a structured approach to clinical management
Make appropriate use of other professionals and services
Provide urgent care when needed
8. 	Managing medical complexity
Enable people with long-term conditions to improve their health
Manage concurrent health problems in an individual patient
Adopt safe and efective approaches for patients with complex health needs
➠ 4

-- 19 of 575 --

➠ 5
RCGP Capabilities
9. Working with colleagues and in teams
Work as an efective team member
Coordinate a team-based approach to the care of patients
10. Maintaining performance, learning and teaching (assessed in WPBA)
11. Organisation, management and leadership
Make efective use of information management and communication systems
12. Practising holistically and promoting health
Demonstrate the holistic mindset of a generalist medical practitioner
Support people through individual experiences of health, illness and recovery
13. Community orientation
Understand the health service and your role within it

-- 20 of 575 --

Consultation Models
You may well have been taught a framework or model for your consultations. Using a tried and tested
structure can help to ensure that you remember all the key phases and don’t leave anything out. Te exam
is marked in three diferent domains, and we will explore how some of the common models ft with this and
which skills contribute to each domain. Although the individual models difer in their detail, most conform
broadly to the following fve-stage structure:
• 	Find out why the patient has come
• 	Work out what’s wrong
• 	Explain the problem(s) to the patient
• 	Develop a management plan and share this with the patient
• 	Use time well and efciently
Some also have a sixth stage – take care of yourself. Very important for both exam purposes and life beyond
as an independent practitioner.
Te exam marking domains are:
Data gathering, technical and assessment skills (fnd out why the patient has come and work out what’s
wrong)
Clinical management (make a diagnosis or state your impression, explain the problem to the patient, develop
and negotiate a management plan with the patient)
Interpersonal skills (evidenced throughout the consultation from beginning to end)
Using time well and efciently is essential because, if you run out of time before you get to the management
plan, you will score no marks in that area – a recipe for failure.
Looking afer yourself between each consultation is vital – otherwise one ‘bad’ consultation will lead to
another. Some, afer a difcult or dysfunctional simulated consultation, will use any time between patients
to pore over the previous patient’s notes. Tey try to work out what went wrong, rather than putting it out
of their mind and spending precious moments reading and thinking about the next patient. Don’t let this
happen to you! Similarly, afer a real consultation that may not have gone well, or has lef you feeling strong
emotions, it is important to regather your thoughts, ‘housekeep’ and focus before seeing the next patient.
Let’s look at some common models and see where the diferent stages ft within the consultation skills exam
marking structure.
➠ 6

-- 21 of 575 --

➠ 7
Consultation Models
Pendleton (1984)
One of the frst patient-centred models.
Seven tasks:
A. Data gathering
1. Find out why the patient has come, including the problem (cause, efects, history) and the patient’s ideas,
concerns and expectations.
2. Consider other problems.
B. Clinical management
3. Choose (with the patient) an appropriate action for each problem.
4. Achieve a shared understanding of the problems.
5. Involve the patient in the management and encourage them to accept appropriate responsibility.
6. Use time and resources appropriately.
C. Interpersonal skills
7. Establish or maintain a relationship with the patient which helps to achieve the other tasks.
Helman (1981)
Although this isn’t a model of the consultation, Cecil Helman, a medical anthropologist, described six ques-
tions that any patient might have in their head when coming to see the doctor. It is well worth bearing these
in mind when data gathering, particularly around ICE (ideas, concerns and expectations) and in clinical
management, when you are explaining to the patient. Armed with the patient’s own thoughts, fears and
hopes, the answers to these questions could provide a useful framework for your explanation.
1. What has happened?
2. Why has it happened?
3. Why to me?
4. Why now?
5. What would happen if nothing was done about it?
6. What should I do about it or whom should I consult for further help?

-- 22 of 575 --

Consultation Models
Neighbour (1987)
A fve-part model ‘anchored’ to the fngers of the lef hand, so relatively easy to remember even when you
are stressed.
A. Data gathering
1. Connecting 	Tis stage is about rapport building (interpersonal skills) as well as gathering data.
‘Connection’ starts the moment the patient walks through the door. Look at the patient, what do you
notice? How do they seem? What is this telling you? Tune in to the patient to get on their wavelength.
Explore their story until you have enough information to summarise.
2. Summarising 	If you are unsure, or even in a consultation ‘hole’ where you are struggling, summarising
is the best tool to get you back on track again.
B. Clinical management
3. Handing over 	Tis is where doctor and patient negotiate and agree a management plan and empower
the patient by ‘hand over’ of control.
4. Safety netting 	Safety netting ensures there are safe contingency plans. Neighbour describes a really
robust structure for a three-point safety net. A vague ‘come back if you’re no better’ is unlikely to score
you any marks in the RCGP consultation skills exam, so learn and use this structure:
i. 	Tis is what I expect to happen.
ii. Tis is how you [the patient] will know if I’m wrong.
iii. If that happens, this is what you should do.
Easy and safe!
C. Interpersonal skills
As with other models, these run as a thread from beginning to end of the consultation. Neighbour’s ffh
stage is ‘Housekeeping’. In his book, he describes a number of quick and easy ways to deal with stress and
negative feelings that have arisen during the consultation so that you can ensure you are in the best shape
ready for the next patient. Well worth a read. Tese techniques are easy to learn and applicable to all your
future consultations.
➠ 8

-- 23 of 575 --

➠ 9
Consultation Models
Calgary Cambridge
Tis is a very comprehensive and evidence-based approach to the consultation – another fve-stage model
which includes specifc detail of tools and techniques.
A. Data gathering
1. Initiating the session
Introductions.
Establishing rapport.
Finding out the reason for the consultation.
2. Gathering information
Exploring the patient’s perspective using a range of verbal and non-verbal communication skills
including open and closed questions, ICE, clarification, summarising, etc. Finding out ‘Why
now?’ – the universal question of the consultation is ‘Why has this patient come today with this
problem?’ If you can’t answer this by the end of the consultation, you may well have missed some-
thing important!
B. Clinical management
3. Explanation and planning
Finds out what the patient knows.
Asks what the patient wants to know.
‘Chunks and checks’ – information in digestible chunks.
Careful timing of explanations – not too soon.
4. Closing the session
Safety nets and follow-up.
C. Interpersonal skills
5. Building the relationship
Developing rapport.
Accepting the patient’s views as legitimate.
Using non-verbal behaviour.
Involving the patient (e.g. thinking aloud, explicitly describing examination process and fndings).
Calgary Cambridge also explores the very important feature of providing structure to the consultation by
approaching it logically, using mini-summaries and keeping to time. All very important – a messy disordered
consultation is inefcient.

-- 24 of 575 --

Consultation Models
6 S for success
A newer model developed in 2013 by Alex Watson with an easy to remember alliterative ‘6 S’ model.
Story, Summarising, Sharing, Securing, Status, Sanity.
A. Data gathering
1. Story – connecting with the patient, being attentive, letting them tell their story, demonstrating verbally
and non-verbally that you are listening to what they are saying. Find out thoughts, hopes and fears. Find
the subplot if there is one.
2. Summarising – an opportunity to review what has been said so far, non-judgementally. Te patient feels
listened to and there is opportunity to clarify, add additional information and correct any misunder-
standings before moving on.
B. Clinical management
3. Sharing – moving from listening to discussion about management, including the patient’s thoughts,
fears and hopes and incorporating the doctor’s view. Any risks can also be discussed and shared between
doctor and patient.
4. Securing – safety netting the consultation, securing the evidence by making notes. (Written notes are,
of course, not currently assessed by the RCGP in the fnal clinical/consultation skills assessment exam!)
C. Interpersonal skills
5. Status – again, something that overarches and underpins the consultation: how we behave with others,
how they perceive us and we perceive them and how this afects the consultation for good or bad. A
mid-level point is the most helpful so that the clinician takes care to be warm, interested and on a level
with the patient, avoiding the unhelpful extremes of arrogance/aloofness and timidity/being apologetic.
Watson’s sixth stage is ‘Sanity’ – similar to housekeeping described by Neighbour. Making sure that you are
in good shape for the next patient and for your future in general practice.
➠ 10

-- 25 of 575 --

➠ 11
CHAPTER 1C SKILLS REQUIRED FOR THIS EXAM AND
MARKING THOSE SKILLS
FOCUS Consultation Model
We developed the FOCUS Consultation Model to help you demonstrate the skills required for the RCGP
clinical and consultation skills exam. We don’t expect you to learn and remember all the elements and a
formulated approach is not natural. We encourage you to fnd your own style – be fexible. However, the
more you practise these elements, the more fuent you will become, so that you can use them with ease
when you need to.
Consider how long you will allow yourself for each element. If an element is taking longer, keep bringing
the patient back into the discussion, e.g. checking their understanding or reaction.
FILTER
Data gathering, starting with many open questions, then grouping together closed questions (risk assessment
and red fags) to focus the history as you formulate a potential hypothesis. If appropriate, check history: past
medical history (PMH), drug history (DH), family history (FH) and social history (SH) to look for relevant
information which will ultimately afect diagnosis and management. Any information from the notes that
you are using to help you should be clearly discussed. Examinations should be focused.
OPPORTUNITY
Tis is your opportunity to connect with the patient and demonstrate interpersonal skills (IPS) – remember
that these are not an assessment of being polite or articulate. IPS are about making a connection, demon-
strating a genuine interest in the person, and most importantly, how you tailor the rest of the consultation
to meet the patient’s needs based on information they have shared. Use identifed cues to give the patient
the opportunity to discuss their ICE (ideas, concerns and expectations).
Be curious, sense how they are feeling and assess the impact of their symptoms on their life.
It is intended that Filter and Opportunity can be done in any order, or ofen interspersed. We would encour-
age trying to discover the ‘Opportunity’ information early in the consultation.
CONTEXT
Tis is where you question ‘What is going on here?’ and is the moment for the doctor and patient to come
together on the same page. Tink about how the information discovered in Filter is afected by/relates to
the information gathered in Opportunity. Te skill includes stating your impression regarding the potential
diagnosis or diferential diagnoses. Another important skill is referring to ICE within your explanation and
a statement of empathy refects the challenges they are facing (problem + fears + social context).
UNITE
Share the management plan to unite doctor and patient. Discuss your recommendation as well as options:
what can the patient do (demonstrating empowerment); what can I do; what can others (specialists/family)
do; and fnally what resources (websites, support groups, patient information leafets) are available? Be
specifc regarding medicines, follow-up plans and logistics.
SAFETY
Always ofer a specifc safety net – what do they need to look out for? How long should they wait before
returning? What should they do if they feel they are getting worse? What actions are required for both the
doctor and patient?
Te diagrammatic model illustrates how the model links to the RCGP mark scheme.

-- 26 of 575 --

FOCUS Consultation Model
Open, Flags, Risk,
History, Examination
Curious, Impact, ICE,
Sense
SummarICE, Empathy, Impression,
Experience, Explanation
Safety net, Follow-up, Speciÿcs
Data gathering,
technical and
assessment skills
FFilter
OOpportunity
UUnite
CContext
SSafety
Interpersonal
skills
Curious
Impact
ICE
Sense
SummarICE
InCludE
Empathy
Explanation
Empower
Decision
making and
clinical
management
Options, InCludE, Recommend,
Empower, Future
➠ 12

-- 27 of 575 --

FOCUS Consultation Model
Te FOCUS Consultation Model groups the key elements of the consultation.
➠ 13
FILTER
Open 	Ask as many open questions as possible to collect the story.
Flags 	Use focused questions. Check for red fags and whittle down diferentials.
Risk 	Ask about risk factors for your suspected diagnosis.
History 	Take the history: past, systemic, family, medicines and social.
Examination 	A focused examination to confrm or refute your hypothesis or exclude signifcant
disease. Explain exactly what you would like to examine and gain informed consent.
OPPORTUNITY
Curious 	Respond to verbal cues and explore.
E.g. ‘You mentioned your friend. What is their experience of…?’
Impact 	Find out how the problem has afected the patient: open questions about impact work
really well at the beginning of the consultation. Use this information to smoothly
transition to ICE. Impact questions make great open questions at the beginning of the
consultation.
ICE 	Explore ideas, concerns and expectations. ‘Tis is clearly afecting you a lot day to day,
have you had thoughts about what is going on?’
Sense 	Refect what you sense (feelings or emotions) from non-verbal cues.
E.g. ‘I feel/can see that (fdgeting/breathless/distracted/in a rush)…’
CONTEXT
SummarICE 	Demonstrate that you have listened by summarising the ICE.
Empathy 	Show you have put the problem into the context of their life.
E.g. ‘I can see your past experience of…can lead you to consider…’
Impression 	State your impression! Make a diagnosis if you can, or state the likely diferentials.
Experience 	Check their understanding or experience of what you have diagnosed. Incorporate what
you have learnt from ICE.
Explanation 	Provide a concise and jargon-free explanation. Tell the patient what they need to know;
don’t bombard them with extra unnecessary detail, however much you know.
UNITE
Options 	Provide an organised list of options, Confrm their understanding and interest. A useful
framework includes: ‘Tings that you can do…, I can do…, others can help with…’
InCludE 	Incorporate what you have learnt from asking and listening to the patient’s expectations.
Recommend 	As well as options, you should also help guide the patient’s decision by stating your own
recommendation for the way forward.
Empower 	Suggest what the patient can do themselves to help the problem.
Future 	Explain what you believe should or is likely to happen at the next steps.
E.g. ‘Tinking ahead…Return to the GP in…’
E.g. ‘At the hospital you can expect to…’

-- 28 of 575 --

FOCUS Consultation Model
SAFETY
Safety net 	Give clear instructions about what to look out for and what the patient should do in
these circumstances.
Follow-up 	Will you need to see the patient again? If so, when and how should they make this
arrangement?
Specifcs 	Remember to be specifc about time intervals, for example – who is booking an appoint-
ment, with whom, in what situation?
Remember to ask:
Paediatrics: gestation, delivery, postnatal, immunisations and development.
Women’s health: last menstrual period, cycle, post-coital bleeding, intermenstrual
bleeding, discharge, smears, parity and operations.
➠ 14

-- 29 of 575 --

➠ 15
ICE, SummarICE and InCludE
Working with many hundreds of trainees preparing for their consultation assessment exams, both CSA and
RCA, we have frequently noticed that ICE, if asked at all, is ofen then neglected or ignored in the remainder
of the consultation. For good consultations and excellent marks, it is essential not just to elicit ICE, but also
to use it. We suggest the following easy-to-remember technique.
1. Elicit ICE – see below for how to do this.
2. Use this information in the midpoint summary – SummarICE, to demonstrate that you have heard the
patient.
3. Include this information when stating your impression or negotiating a plan – InCludE.
Elicit ICE. With good rapport and attentive listening, any or all components of ICE may emerge naturally
as the patient is talking to you, particularly if you use open questions. If not, you may need to use some
specifc prompts:
Ideas/thoughts. What does the patient think about their symptoms? In their eyes, what might the problem
be? If it’s not crystal clear, ask! If the patient says ‘nothing’, this is unlikely to be true: it’s just that the patient
has not yet felt able to tell you. Ask again, rephrase the question, show that you are interested in the patient’s
thoughts through rapport, such as eye contact, nodding, minimal encouragers, giving the patient your whole
attention and allowing space to listen. Remember, their thoughts may have come from:
• 	Past experience
• 	Others’ experience – friends, work colleagues, neighbours
• 	Te internet
• 	Newspaper articles, TV programmes – factual and fctional
Tere may be cues to follow – ‘I read in the paper that...’, ‘John thinks...’, ‘I had this before and...’, ‘A friend at
work…’
Concerns/worries. What has worried the patient enough to make an appointment with you? You could try:
‘I sense you are worried about this.’ (Pause and listen). Tis is a statement used as a question, so is sofer and
less blunt than ‘What are you worrying about?’ which may lead to the answer ‘nothing’ (unlikely to be true)
or something that may not be directly relevant (my job/debt/the neighbours).
‘Is there anything, however unlikely, that you are particularly worried this might be?’
If someone else has been mentioned (my friend, John, my husband/wife/daughter), make use of this and
ask ‘Tell me what worries your friend/John, etc. about this.’
Remember that you cannot second-guess what the patient’s worries might be – they are unique to that per-
son. If you try and guess, you may well be wrong. Teir thoughts or worries may be incorrect or implausible,
but they are the patient’s reality – hold on to them so that you can use them later.
Expectations. Finding out what the patient is hoping for from you will potentially save you a lot of time
later, whether or not it is a practical or appropriate way forward. Try:
‘What did you have in mind that I might be able to do for you?’ ‘When you booked the appointment/were sitting
in the waiting room, was there anything in particular you were hoping for from today?’
Remember not to ask this too early, otherwise it might come across as if you don’t know and are asking the
patient for a clue to the way ahead. Try ‘I’ve already got some thoughts myself about what we could do but I
am interested to hear what you think.’

-- 30 of 575 --

SummarICE (Summarise ICE). When you know you have enough information to formulate a diagnosis and
a plan, including all three components of ICE, summarising is an excellent way to demonstrate to the patient
that you have heard what they’ve said and to mark the transition from data gathering to clinical management.
Instead of summarising all the history, try summarising ICE, i.e. SummarICE. Perhaps also include
impact – the way the problem is afecting the patient’s life.
‘You’ve had this cough for more than a week. You thought it might be a chest infection needing antibiotics, but
at the back of your mind you are worried about cancer, given that you smoked until recently. It’s been hard to
sleep at night for coughing so your husband’s moved into the spare room.’
‘For a month or so you’ve had chest pain when you walk which you thought might be muscle strain from trim-
ming the hedge, but you were also concerned about your heart and were hoping I might do a chest X-ray and
heart tracing/refer you to the hospital.’
Tis is a more time-efcient and tailored summary than going through all the symptoms again.
InCludE (Include ICE). Te midpoint summary will remind you to include the patient’s ideas and concerns
when stating your ‘Impression’:
‘You thought this might be a chest infection – having listened to your symptoms and examined you, I agree/I
don’t think it is.’
‘I don’t think it’s likely that chest pain when you walk is connected with muscle strain from using the hedge
trimmer. Te fact that it comes on when you exercise and goes when you stop might suggest pain from the
heart muscle, called angina.’
‘You were worried about cancer – although unlikely because you haven’t lost weight or coughed up blood [red
fags], I agree it is something we should exclude.’
You can either include expectations here, or a little later when negotiating the plan:
‘As you’ve had the symptoms for a week, and I can hear signs of infection in your chest, I agree an antibiotic
may well help.’
‘You mentioned a chest X-ray – I don’t think that would add much at this stage but if you still have symptoms
in a week, we should think about one then.’
➠ 16

-- 31 of 575 --

➠ 17
Practising the Skills within FOCUS
Recognise your strengths! Ten consider which elements you fnd the most challenging.
Target your revision. Analyse and fne tune each microskill, a day at a time.
FILTER 	Be assertive and sharpen your history
Non-verbal 	Use videos to analyse non-verbal communication.
Open 	Concentrate on routinely asking a series of encouraging/open questions – at least three
before you move to semi-closed or closed questions. Can you rephrase your questions?
For example, ‘When did it start?’ is a semi-closed question, but ‘How did it start?’ is open
and will yield much richer answers.
History 	Critique your consultations. Do you ask questions which actually change your
management?
Examination 	Use the examination examples in Chapter 22 to practise your skills.
OPPORTUNITY
Curious 	Work on reacting to those cues, e.g. repeating phrases back to patients.
ICE 	We fnd asking ICE early is helpful and continues the use of open questions. Ensure
you have found the answers to all three questions. If a patient has already provided you
with the information, to demonstrate you were listening, acknowledge this and consider
asking questions to explore if there’s more to be found. Te way the questions are phrased
can make or break a consultation. E.g. ‘What would you like me to do?’ may be received
negatively, whereas ‘I’m going to be making many suggestions, but was there anything
specifc you were hoping for today?’ enhances rapport and shared understanding.
Impact/Sense 	To fnd out impact, you need to know something about the patient’s life as well as the
problem and ask or explore how the two are related. Put a Post-it Note on your desk at
work to remind you to do this.
CONTEXT
Empathy and
SummarICE 	With every patient you see, practise summarising their ICE followed by a statement
which links the ICE to their background, experience or situation.
Impression and
Experience 	Always ensure you state your impression/diagnosis at 5–6 minutes followed by a pause.
Explanation 	Practise giving clear and concise explanations for diagnoses and your recommendations.

-- 32 of 575 --

Practising the Skills within FOCUS
UNITE
Options 	Organise your thoughts and practise using a 3-dimensional approach. Tink about
what you can do, what the patient can do (self-help) and where others (friends, family,
referrals) could help . Using this framework will help you to produce a structured man-
agement plan for almost any presenting problem.
InCludE 	‘You were worried about… and thought we should do… however what’s going through my
mind is… what would you like to do?’
Recommend 	Have the confdence to state ‘My recommendation is…, other options are…’
Empower 	‘Tings you may be interested in are… what are your thoughts?’
Future 	‘We should catch up to discuss this again, how about in…’ Have you been specifc? Is it
clear to the patient what steps you and they are taking regarding any agreed logistics
and management?
SAFETY
Safety net 	Practise excellent documentation to reinforce this. Remember, be specifc. Watching
back recorded consultations can help you check how clear your safety netting is.
Remember the 3-point safety net – ‘Tis is what I expect to happen…this is how you will
know if I’m wrong…this is what to do then.’ Te safety net should of course always be
tailored to the patient and the problem. It should fow naturally from what has been
discussed in the consultation and should provide reassurance and empowerment for
the patient, rather than bafing or scaring them unnecessarily. It is unhelpful and inap-
propriate to use ‘Call 999’ as a backstop at the end of a safety net for a self-limiting and
relatively minor problem.
Remember that few consultations need a catch-all safety net for every eventuality,
however unlikely. For example: a 30-year-old female patient phones you and describes
intermittent diarrhoea and vague abdominal pain for the last year. Tere are no red
fag symptoms at all and she has had no symptoms of any sort for several days. You are
planning to see her tomorrow to examine her and suspect she might have IBS. A ‘safety
net’ that infers she might develop an acute abdomen before you see her, and need to go
immediately to hospital is inappropriate for this patient and her symptoms. It is likely
to be confusing and unnecessarily increase any anxiety. A much simpler statement ‘I’ll
see you tomorrow as we agreed. I don’t imagine your symptoms will change between now
and then but please phone the surgery if they do’ is all that is needed.
➠ 18

-- 33 of 575 --

➠ 19
How to Demonstrate Skills: The Marking
Scheme Made Easy
Data gathering is about uncovering the clinical information appropriate to the problem/s presented by the
patient. Tis process should be efcient and logical, using appropriate open and closed questions, including
fnding out risk factors and red fags. Any physical examination described or undertaken should be relevant
and slick, performed in a logical order and any instruments should be used fuently. Tis domain may include
limited near-patient investigations if appropriate to the presentation, such as urinalysis.
Clinical management should refect the diferential diagnosis and be feasible and evidence based and refect
any identifed risks. In a remote or telephone consultation, the management may include the description of
any examination planned and how this will help with the diagnosis and management.
Interpersonal skills are the communication skills and collaboration with patients, including ethics, values
and attitudes, that you demonstrate throughout the consultation. For example, in the frst half, these would
include fnding out ICE, responding to cues and responding with interest to the patient’s views. Any exam-
ination should show sensitivity for the patient’s feelings and consent through clear explanations of what you
hope to examine and why it is helpful.
Any plan would demonstrate that you have responded to the patient’s feelings, preferences and hopes,
including explaining risk efectively.
Interpersonal skills also include values and ethics – such as demonstrating equality, responding positively
to problems, admitting mistakes, being open and non-judgemental.
Demonstrating IPS as a GP requires proactive and reactive communication skills. Our FOCUS model
(Filter, Opportunity, Context, Unite, Safety) reminds you to take the opportunity to connect with the patient.
Careful IPS should be demonstrated at every step of the consultation.
Our useful E’s for interpersonal skills
Encourage 	Teir contribution. Not only ask ICE, but also return to it during your explanations or
recommendations.
Explore 	Teir cues or anything you sense from the patient. Explore ICE and the impact of the
issue.
Empathy 	Pulling together all the patient’s challenges and collectively refecting these back to them.
How we break this down to teach it… Symptoms + fears + social challenges = impact +
ofer your support.
Explain 	(a) Provide explanations of why your questions are important, e.g. you could do this
with ICE questions. (b) Share your thought process clearly, using language tailored to
the individual patient.
Engage 	Te patient in shared management and health promotion.
Empower 	Share your knowledge to empower the patient and involve them at every step in the plan.
Provide them with the opportunity to (a) make an informed decision and (b) consider
self-help strategies.
Elephants 	E.g. issues either the patient or doctor is nervous to mention. Address them early in a
sensitive way to allow time to deal with them.
Tis is not a fnite list and you should carefully read the RCGP document – ‘Generic grade descriptors’ for
a more comprehensive description.

-- 34 of 575 --

Easy-to-Use Generic Feedback Card
Below are some pointers that you can look for when marking each other’s cases. On the next page there is
a blank grid that you could photocopy to make marking easier. Look for what the doctor has done well and
what could be improved in each domain.
Data gathering:
• 	Was the main reason for attendance established? Were relevant red fags checked?
• 	Was an organised system used for gathering background information: PMH, DH, FH, SH?
• 	Was there an appropriate and slick examination where necessary?
• 	Did the doctor use information from the notes and was this made explicit and discussed?
• 	Were any instruments required during the examination used profciently?
Clinical management:
• 	Was an appropriate working diagnosis made?
• 	Was the plan tailored to the patient?
• 	Did the doctor state their recommendation and other possibilities?
• 	Was an appropriate management plan discussed with the patient including appropriate tests, medication,
referrals, follow-up, etc.?
• 	Were opportunities to tackle health promotion found?
• 	Did the doctor add an appropriate safety net?
Interpersonal skills:
• 	Were cues in the history picked up and addressed?
• 	Were ideas, concerns and expectations elicited?
• 	Did the doctor adopt a sensitive approach? Without prejudice, judgement and assumption?
• 	Did the doctor provide clear explanations using appropriate language?
• 	Did the doctor involve the patient in decisions?
• 	Did the doctor demonstrate active listening skills?
• 	Did the doctor demonstrate empathy through their communication skills?
• 	Did they fnd out how the patient’s problem and individual psychosocial situation were intervolved?
• 	How did the doctor show that they were genuinely interested in the patient?
• 	Did the doctor empower the patient and how?
Possible negative descriptors for feedback and to discuss:
• 	Te consultation appeared disorganised.
• 	A signifcant agenda, abnormal result or red fag was missed.
• 	Failure to examine (if appropriate).
• 	Poor time management.
• 	Te focus of the consultation was on the wrong agenda/complaint.
• 	Te doctor provided little or no opportunity to involve the patient in management decisions.
• 	Cues were missed.
• 	Te consultation was low challenge.
➠ 20

-- 35 of 575 --

Easy-to-Use Generic Feedback Card
Case
➠ 21
Data Gathering
POSITIVE 	NEGATIVE
Clinical Management
POSITIVE 	NEGATIVE
Interpersonal Skills
POSITIVE 	NEGATIVE

-- 36 of 575 --

CHAPTER 1D OUR USEFUL TIPS
Structure and Time Management
For every consultation, you need to fnd the answer to the question: ‘Why has this patient presented today
with this problem?’
How to achieve this in a 10–12-minute consultation
1. Be concise. Use as few words as possible and choose words carefully to ask concise, clear questions.
Remember that open questions are most likely to reveal the detail you need.
2. Te ‘golden minute’ is usually rich in important detail. Te patient’s fow can be extended by using open
questions. Choose questions that guide the patient to give information that is crucial to your assessment.
E.g. ‘How did it start?’ Rather than ‘When did it start’ which is a closed question.
3. Repeat their words, with a rising infexion so they sound like questions. ‘Chest pain? Feeling low?’
4. Absorb the answers that follow and don’t ask questions where you already know the answers.
5. Be organised – lots of open questions frst, then group your closed questions (red fags).
6. Aim for the important moment of the consultation at 5–6 minutes – where you state your impression.
7. Be systematic with how you present your management plan.
8. Be assertive. See below.
9. Keep up momentum. Imagine you are on a ski slalom and quickly need to go around all the gates on
the way down the hill. Te gradient is the same throughout, so avoid being too slow at the start then
speeding up in panic towards the end. Certainly, don’t turn around and go back up the hill to cover old
ground!
10. Avoid wasting time with unnecessary phrases. Every second counts in a 10–12-minute consultation. We
ofen hear ‘May I ask you some questions’ which is always followed by ‘Yes of course’. Tere’s no need to
say this unless you are signposting that you are about to ask some very personal questions.
11. Too much sympathy is neither helpful nor efcient. Interpersonal skills require an assertive not just a
‘nice’ doctor. Always be sensitive, however. Continue to move the consultation forward and demonstrate
you are ‘nice’ by:
• 	asking thoughtful questions ‘What is it like living with <x>?’
• 	demonstrating an interest in the person ‘What’s this past year been like for you?’
• 	connecting through exploring cues and ICE.
Tis information helps you to work towards demonstrating ‘proactive empathy’ (you’ve worked for it) which
silently, yet powerfully suggests to the patient ‘I hear you’.
Remember our empathy equation: problem + fears + social context = an understanding and expression of
how things are: e.g. ‘really tough’.
How to develop your time management skills
• 	Go back to basics. Write down a structure you hope to follow (allowing fexibility).
• 	Dissect your consultations in detail. Listen to your videos and be critical with your chosen words within
questions. Could you have rephrased to ask more skillful questions which efciently provide important
answers.
• 	Practise going from the moment you give a diagnosis to how you present a recommended management
plan and involve the patient in the decision-making process.
• 	Practise giving slick explanations of diagnoses to diferent patient groups, e.g. migraine to a lawyer,
asthma to a 7-year-old who just wants to play football.
➠ 22

-- 37 of 575 --

➠ 23
Structure and Time Management
Remember you can be assertive and yet remain patient centred. You can be assertive through having a
structure, asking questions that demonstrate your curiosity and interest, reacting to the patient’s needs,
agenda and cues, being organised, using signposting and keeping the momentum of the consultation going.
Encourage the patient’s contributions, provide clear explanations to empower the patient and provide them
with opportunities for informed decision making.
Signposting
Can be useful during data gathering and clinical management. It provides structure for both doctor and
patient and facilitates organisation of the consultation. Signposting is especially useful if the patient has
questions that require answering or there are many problems. In both situations, the GP can propose an
‘agenda’ based on the patient’s requests and any risk the doctor may have detected.
Managing the consultation with multiple problems
Sometimes the problems may be connected or require management in parallel, e.g. a physical symptom
and the psychological impact.
However, should the problems not be connected, remain organised, risk assess for each problem if appropri-
ate, agree where to focus your remaining time, then signpost that you will move on to their second problem
aferwards or if required in another consultation. In a recorded consultation, the examiner will stop listen-
ing afer 12 minutes so in this situation, with unconnected problems, you should focus on one in the frst
12 minutes, moving on to the second problem later or scheduling a further consultation. Prioritise which
problem to deal with frst, either because of the level of clinical risk or, if all problems are minor and there
is no stand-out issue, then let the patient guide you to the problem they would most like help with today.
Consider how you come across to the patient (and in this case the examiner) when the patient mentions a
symptom that you know requires time to safely explore. You appreciate that it is likely to require another
consultation and therefore their comment instantly increases the demands of the 12-minute consultation.
You may feel frustrated and under pressure, but you need to appear calm.
For example, the patient mentions another unrelated symptom (e.g. headaches) when you have only just
started discussing their breathlessness… Phrases which may help: ‘Tell me more about that.’ Tis gives you
time to consider if they could be related (potentially a rare condition). Or ‘We need to give each problem,
the breathlessness and the headache, the time it deserves. Which do you feel we need to concentrate on today’
or ‘frst today?’
Risk assess! Ask them the red fags for both problems. You can then reassure the patient and yourself why
you have not explored it further today. If the patient is being vague, you may need to say, ‘I need to ask you
some specifc questions (red fags) that will help me to rule out (e.g.) a blood clot on the lung.’ Ten thank and
reassure. If the patient selects the symptom which you feel is less important, e.g. tension-type headache over
breast lump or haematemesis, explain your concern to the patient and ask their permission to redirect the
consultation. ‘Would you mind if we discuss … frst as I am concerned about …?’

-- 38 of 575 --

Structure and Time Management
Structuring management plans
Here is a possible sequence to the latter half of a consultation. Remember in order to also demonstrate IPS,
afer each point invite the patient into the consultation by pausing or asking for their thoughts.
1. State your impression or diferential diagnosis. We refer to this as the pause or pivotal moment. You
share your thoughts with the patient and allow them a moment to absorb this information. Te consul-
tation has just swung from data gathering to clinical management. Practise the moment of providing
a diferential diagnosis. Consider our mantra, ‘Common things are common but what mustn’t I miss?’
You may fnd yourself in the following scenarios:
i. 	You believe the worrying diagnosis (e.g. cancer) is low on your diferential list, but still needs to be
ruled out or discussed, to address the patient’s fears or the potential ‘elephant in the room’. Use a
reassuring tone, explaining your suspected diagnosis. Use negative red fags to explain why you do
not suspect cancer. Explain the importance of your recommendation of appropriate investigations
to confrm your hypothesis and rule out a diagnosis of cancer.
ii. Te cancer is at the top of your diferential list. You therefore combine your breaking bad news skills
as you sensitively approach the seriousness of the unconfrmed problem and the need for the 2WW
referral.
2. Pause. Give the patient space to think or talk. If required, encourage their understanding or response
to this information.
3. Explanation (and empower). Consider incorporating the patient’s ICE here so you haven’t just asked it,
you’ve woven their answers into the explanation to ensure you’ve addressed each health belief in turn.
Ask yourself, do I agree or disagree with the patient’s thoughts? Do I share the patient’s worries or can
I reassure? Are the patient’s expectations realistic or not?
4. Empathy – could be useful here if not already expressed.
5. ‘My recommendation is… what are your thoughts?’
6. Aim for fve appropriate things that you ofer the patient, to ensure you have provided a compre-
hensive management plan, which may include:
• 	Investigations that may be needed to include or exclude diferentials. Consider resources and avoid
over-investigating. It is good practice to explain which tests you believe are necessary and why, and
this also tells the examiner.
• 	Medications. Use the 5-point process – what is the drug, why you’re recommending it, how to take it,
potential problems and ask them how they feel about this option. Leave the issuing of the prescription
until the end. Avoid spending time with your head in a BNF.
• 	Referral. Te logistics of the referral process and what to expect from the referral.
• 	General health. If there is more than one problem, or coexisting health issues, these should also be
considered in the plan. Discuss what the patient can do through health promotion, disease preven-
tion and rehabilitation (empowerment). A practical way of helping you do this is to consider the
three dimensions of self, GP and others:
• 	Tis is what you can do….
• 	Tis is what I, the GP can do.
• 	Tis is what ‘others’ can do. Others may include other professionals, family members, exercises,
resources such as educational material or leafets.
• 	Specifcs (who/what/when/how), when describing appropriate follow-up and a safety net.
➠ 24

-- 39 of 575 --

➠ 25
Demonstrating Interpersonal Skills
Softening and normalising
If questions are asked with a formulaic approach, this does not demonstrate the doctor’s ability to tailor the
questions to the information the patient has already provided. Tere are approaches that can sofen questions
and explanations and demonstrate that you are sensitive to the impact of your conclusions. We encourage
you to fnd what feels authentic to you.
Here are some examples:
‘Sometimes when people come to see me with acne, it is afecting their life in diferent ways. I’m wondering if
this is the case for you?’ (Normalising)
‘What is it like living with this pain every day?’
‘Some people fnd x helpful.’
‘If I were to suggest you had x diagnosis, what are your thoughts?’
How the patient should feel when they leave the consultation
• 	Understood.
• 	With a diagnosis or, as a minimum, the most likely of a list of diferentials.
• 	With an understanding of the plan and the specifc actions required.
• 	Empowered – the doctor’s knowledge and involved in the plan.
• 	Feeling positive and reassured, if not from the diagnosis, from the comfort of receiving excellent care
with a feeling of trust in their doctor.
Child consultation
When possible, involve the child using language appropriate to their stage of development. Try to involve
both child’s and parent’s perspective, including ICE, where possible. Te parent may wish to lead, but keep
asking and including the child.
Connection and empathy
Rapport means connection with the patient. We avoid using the words ‘I understand’ and instead suggest
you explore and absorb all the information and refect it back to silently show ‘I hear you.’
When we teach how to demonstrate empathy, we suggest using the following equation of challenges to
refect back to the patient:
Problem + Fears + Social context = What you sense (e.g. really tough, exhausting)
Follow this with silence for a response.
Another very useful question is ‘What is it like living with x?’
Te good news is, the more challenging the case, the greater the opportunity to shine and overcome the
challenge if you have skills to connect and empathise with the patient.
A useful approach to elicit the psychosocial context may include:
‘Tell me about you … who is in your life?’
‘Do you work?’ Ten either ‘What does work involve?’ or ‘What do you do in a typical day?’
‘What is home like at the moment?’
‘Have there been challenges or changes in your life?’
‘How have you been feeling with all this going on?’

-- 40 of 575 --

Demonstrating Interpersonal Skills
Avoiding assumptions
Avoid leading questions and make no assumptions. Trainees may fall into this trap when they believe a
patient has told them their concern. We recommend ensuring you acknowledge the concern you have heard
and then ask explicitly about further thoughts, fears and hopes. If medication is potentially linked to the
problem, don’t assume compliance – ask about medication taken and doses.
Detecting and responding to verbal cues
A doctor on the phone has to work harder with their senses. Without visual cues, the doctor’s ears need to
be listening out for hesitations, changes and emotions within the voice. Remember we encourage you to
make a statement about what you ‘Sense’ (see FOCUS model).
Although we would encourage you to submit some cases which are face-to-face, as we believe it is easier to
connect with your patient in person, there is no statistical diference between candidates’ scores received
for the diferent formats – face-to-face, video or telephone consultations.
Verbal cues are ofen expressions that are unique to the person, e.g. a description of a feeling (subjective
rather than fact). A person may also be mentioned. Be curious, repeat the word they have chosen to fnd out
why. Use your senses to also detect the non-verbal cues. Imagine you are opening a hyperlink to another page
of information. Cues will be obvious to an examiner, but will require you to be receptive, remembering that
you are in the ‘hot seat’ with the combined challenge of receiving, processing and formatting information.
Do not fear that you may go down ‘the wrong track’, you will soon discover if your hunch was wrong. Cues
are clues to help us treat both the problem and the person.
Avoid ‘parking’ cues. We ofen hear doctors say ‘We’ll come back to that’ or state aferwards that they did
hear the cue but feared going down the wrong path if they explored further. In a simulated case, an actor
would normally ‘shut you down’ rather than fabricate an answer, if you were on the wrong track. In your
consultation room, however, we appreciate that anything can happen when patients are trying to be helpful.
Remember, though, that if you hear a potential cue, the examiner will have heard it too! If you don’t explore
it, frstly, you may miss important information but also you are not demonstrating to the examiner that you
have heard the cue. Always remember that cues are clues – for example leading you to important psychosocial
factors which are afecting the patient.
Try asking or repeating a word the patient has used, but in the style of asking a question – perhaps using a
rising infexion in your voice. In a recorded consultation, you may then discover vital information. Should
the patient take you down the garden path with a problem that you conclude is not relevant, don’t submit
the case. But do ensure that you submit some cases which demonstrate your cue-spotting skills.
Explanations of grey areas
Tere are many grey areas in general practice! Holding the responsibility of potential risk is the greatest
challenge. Diagnoses and management plans don’t always ft into boxes or guidelines. Use present AND
absent red fags to help direct your management or possible referral. It is usually helpful to verbalise the
dilemma: if you explain clearly why the symptom or your management suggestion is atypical, the standard
guidance and what details have led to your uncertainty. Both the patient and the examiner will then under-
stand your thought process.
Te doctor should present their rationale using evidence-based medicine and provide a recommendation
to empower the patient and enable an informed decision. Consider if you can tailor your recommendation
to the important features of the history. Be organised with your explanations and ensure you are clear.
Remember that patients shouldn’t be expected to advise the doctor and some patients do not want the emo-
tional burden of making a decision. A doctor should never share responsibility solely to make themselves
feel better or lighten the weight of responsibility.
➠ 26

-- 41 of 575 --

➠ 27
Examinations
For the RCA, clinical examination is no longer a mandatory requirement. Despite this, there will of course be
occasions when it is clinically appropriate to examine the patient in a face-to face consultation, or describe
a planned examination in a remote consultation.
Examination advice for the RCA
• 	Do not stop or edit the tape – it must be a continuous recording.
• 	Ensure that any examination or description of a planned examination is solely to enhance patient care
and for the beneft of the patient, not the examiner. Don’t over-describe. Te patient needs to know what
you will examine and why and how it will help, but they don’t need endless details.
• 	You may well LOSE marks in IPS and CM if the examiner thinks your description of a proposed exam-
ination was unnecessary or inappropriate, perhaps confusing the patient or increasing anxiety.
• 	In a face-to-face consultation, if you do physically examine a patient, be sure you are doing so solely
for the patient’s beneft and that the examination is not in any way ‘staged’ for the examiner. Te RCGP
rightly takes a very dim view of this – there may be serious sanctions such as referral to your Responsible
Ofcer (RO).
• 	If the patient has sent you a photograph, describe what you see using plain English.
• 	At all times, ensure that your descriptions are free of acronyms and jargon.
Performing an examination is generally part of data gathering and usually occurs before you state your
diagnosis. In a remote consultation, however, you may well share your impression of the diagnosis before
discussing an examination, explaining why the examination is important to confrm your diagnosis.
Before any examination, obtain informed consent:
• 	Explain what you would like to examine and the details (take your pulse, listen to your chest).
• 	Ofer a chaperone if appropriate.
• 	Explain how it will be helpful to establish a diagnosis, e.g. what it may rule in or out.
• 	Confrm their consent.
During the examination talk the patient through the examination (see our fnal chapter for examples of
how to do this). Take the patient to the examination couch unless it is more helpful for them to be sitting
in a chair (e.g. thyroid examination). Examine behind the curtain for recorded consultations if removing
clothing, or if the examination requires exposure in the ‘swimsuit area’, i.e. swim shorts for males ≥2 years,
bikini area for females ≥2 years and nappy area for an under 2-year-old. Remember that you will score no
marks for the consultation if there is any exposure of this kind.
Afer the examination sit the patient down and present your fndings sensitively. In their eyes you may be
breaking bad news. Explain what this means – did you confrm your diagnosis?
How to describe a proposed examination during a telephone consultation when you plan to bring
the patient in for an examination
One approach, checking the patient’s response at each step:
• 	Explain what you would like to examine and why.
• 	Discuss your diferential diagnosis.
• 	Explain how the examination may confrm your impression or rule in/out diferent hypotheses.
• 	If at this point the patient clearly wants to know more: ‘If the examination fndings support the diagnosis
of x, my recommendation at this point would be… Other options may be… If, however, the examination
supports the diagnosis of y, my suggestions would be…’
• 	‘A heads up about other suggestions I have, for you to be considering before I see you…’

-- 42 of 575 --

Patients Returning for Test Results
In this book, there are some cases focused on patients returning for test results, which is a normal part of
everyday general practice. Te pitfall here is that your data gathering may be curtailed or even non-exist-
ent, scoring no marks in this domain. Be careful to ensure that you take an appropriate and comprehensive
history from the patient and that you have collected the information yourself rather than summarising what
a colleague may have already discussed. Tis ensures that you give yourself the opportunity to score good
marks. For recorded consultation assessments, you may fnd it easier to demonstrate data-gathering skills
in new presentations rather than follow-up consultations. Although follow-ups can be done well, there are
potential pitfalls and you may have to critique your data gathering with additional care.
When a patient consults for a test result, remember the following:
• 	If you are choosing this consultation as part of recorded assessment, ensure you actually elicit new infor-
mation in the consultation. Summarising what you know so far does not demonstrate data gathering
skills.
• 	Put the investigation into context – why was the test performed and what is the patient expecting?
• 	Tere is a balance between keeping the patient waiting for the result but ensuring you have enough infor-
mation to help you put the result in to appropriate context. You may need to collect some information,
provide the results, but then remember to return to complete your data gathering.
• 	Te result may be the ‘elephant’ in the room. Any result could be perceived by the patient as ‘bad news,’
so ensure you leave enough time to manage their feelings and expectations.
• 	If the patient tries to move the consultation ahead before you are ready, pressing you for the result,
acknowledge their anxiety or question (e.g. blood test or diagnosis of CKD3) straight away and give
them the answer. However, do not be pressured into immediately discussing management options and
go back to the beginning to take the history. It is difcult to score marks for data gathering if you gather
no data!
E.g. ‘I can see you are keen for your results. Te tests show your blood sugar is raised. I’m sure you are keen to
know what that means and where we go from here but, to put this result into the context of you, I need to fnd
out more about you and go through your medical history in more detail frst please.’
➠ 28

-- 43 of 575 --

➠ 29
Vulnerable Patients
For vulnerable and elderly patients, the following questions may be helpful when speaking to them (e.g.
teenager or a person with a learning disability):
• 	Home. Relationship with family. Any stress within the home? Are they a carer? Do they have any
responsibilities (e.g. work to fnancially support the family)?
• 	School. Exams, stress with workload, relationships with friends and bullying?
• 	Mental health. Low self-esteem, mood, anxiety, self-harm or suicidal thoughts? Social habits. Alcohol,
drugs and smoking?
• 	Physical health. Eating, exercise habits and weight changes?
• 	Sexual health. Are they sexually active? Who with? Discuss pregnancy and STI risk.
• 	Vulnerability and abuse. Which adults do they have time alone with? Use of social media? Does anyone
upset them, hurt them, make them feel uncomfortable or encourage them to have sex?
And when consulting with an elderly patient:
• 	ADL. Shopping, meals, cleaning, washing.
• 	Medications. Compliance, polypharmacy and risks (e.g. anticholinergic burden). Is a dosette needed?
• 	Memory and mood.
• 	Risk. Leaving hob on/locking doors/wandering/falls/driving.
• 	Isolation/loneliness. When do they feel vulnerable?
• 	Weight. Are clothes loose? Are they eating?
• 	Continence and bowels.
• 	Risk factors for AKI.
COVID-19
Te submission to publishers of Te Complete MRCGP Casebook was during the rollout of the coronavirus
vaccination programme in 2021. At the time of writing, we therefore do not know what the future holds
regarding the incidence of coronavirus cases and the impact that coronavirus variants may have. We hope
the majority of patients presenting with a cough will have been vaccinated and by the time the book reaches
your eyes the incidence of this disease will have fallen. We have therefore decided not to include corona-
virus in our list of diferential diagnoses, e.g. for a cough. However, we urge you to do so if appropriate and
also advise the patient of the correct management, should the ongoing situation require this consideration.

-- 44 of 575 --

Phrasing Your Questions
Top Tips – when a case feels like it’s going wrong or you have a brain freeze
Tere are ways to pull it back. Can you summarise ICE or is there information you need?
‘What’s been on your mind?’ is a good rescue question, especially if the patient has an unusual opening
gambit.
‘What’s most important to you today?’ Or ask the patient if they have any questions.
‘I’m going to be making suggestions but was there anything you were particularly hoping for.’
Can you empathise to reconnect with the patient?
Be honest. ‘I feel I am not being as helpful as I could be. I’m sorry. Can we take a step back to… and go from
there so I can do a better job?’
FILTER
Clarify understanding… ‘Can you describe what you mean by wheeze/palpitations?’
Instead of the vague ‘Tell me more’ which will waste time because the patient will ask you what you want to
know, try… ‘Tell me the story of (your headaches) from the beginning.’
If they’ve had the symptom for months… ‘What prompted you to come now?’
Checking past history and investigations, etc.… ‘As we haven’t met before, would you mind telling me…’
OPPORTUNITY
ICE, ICE, ICE. It is vital that these questions come across naturally and do not sound robotic, so consider
what information you need. To understand a patient and, more importantly, for the patient to feel under-
stood, the GP needs to explore their health belief; this means their thought process, what is on their mind,
their fear, where this has come from, their experience of a ‘similar’ problem or what they have read, who
they have spoken to and why they have presented now. Be curious! Being aware of what is going through
the patient’s mind will lead you towards what they may be assuming you will do.
If you miss any (or all!) of this, the patient may feel you have missed something crucial and they may be right.
Try variations on the following:
‘Is there anything else that you have been wondering?’
‘Have you had any thoughts about what might be causing your symptoms?’
‘Is there anything else that has been on your mind?’
‘Do you have any thoughts about what you would like us to do?’
‘What is important to you when considering what needs to be done today?’
CONTEXT
Summarise ICE… this is a powerful way to show you understand the patient.
‘Am I on the right track?’ or ‘Have I understood you correctly so far?’
ICE and empathy help address health beliefs in the context of the individual.
Incorporate their thoughts and experience together with their background (social history) to help you
empathise.
‘I can see that because your father had… you are worried this could be… and because you are under a lot of
pressure at the moment with… I can see you have been frightened for what this could mean and had fears of…
but I think what is going on here is….’
➠ 30

-- 45 of 575 --

➠ 31
Phrasing Your Questions
Te result
Te patient feels listened to and understood.
Te doctor understands the patient’s health beliefs and can educate.
You can only genuinely empathise when you have explored the person’s experience.
Another example…
‘You wonder if it could be … I see why you would think that, especially when you have experience of/have gone
through/your mother has gone through… However, my impression is… which may have been caused by…’
You could use the positive and negative red fags to help you here, explaining why you have reached that
conclusion. Check experience (understanding): ‘What do you know about…?’ Ten educate: ‘… is… and
the course of the problem is ofen…’
UNITE
An inappropriate request… ‘Have you thought about any problems with that?’
‘Let’s think through this together.’
Acknowledge their expectation before giving options. ‘I understand you were hoping for… My suggestion of
options for where we go from here include …’
Remember you are the doctor… ‘My recommendation would be…’
But include the patient in the management plan, especially if there are a couple of appropriate options…
‘What do you believe is best for you?’ or ‘What is your preference?’
Structure your management plan within your mind. What can the patient do (e.g. lifestyle factors), what
can I do (e.g. medications, referrals), what can others do (e.g. primary care team, charities, friends/family,
specialists).
If you give a patient an information leafet, you must explain its contents.
SAFETY
Remember to be specifc: ‘If you fnd your child is not able to keep down fuids, they are at risk of becoming
dehydrated, so please contact us at the surgery. If the surgery is closed, dial 111 to speak to an on-call GP.’ ‘If
you fnd you require more than 10 pufs of your inhaler over four hours, please call the surgery. However, if you
require 10 pufs at the same time, please call 999.’
The motivational interview
Fantastic for health promotion cases…
‘How is your general health do you think?’
‘What could be improved?’
‘Do you want… to change?’
‘Do you feel confdent you can change…?’
‘How could you improve…?’
‘What challenges might you encounter with this?’
‘How could you overcome these obstacles?’
‘What steps do you think you may take?’
‘In what time frame should this change happen?’
‘When do you want to meet again to discuss this?’

-- 46 of 575 --

Jargon Switch
Consider the patient in front of you. You may need to change your language.
You may decide to tell your revision partner to tap their pen on the table whenever you use jargon.
For example…
‘2-week wait’ 	An urgent referral where you should be seen by the hospital doctor within 2 weeks
‘Abdomen’ 	Tummy
‘Acute’ 	New symptom
‘Benign’ 	Harmless
‘Cervix’ 	Te neck of the womb
‘Chronic’ 	Symptoms you have had a long time
‘Cyst’ 	Fluid-flled lump that is usually harmless
‘DNA’ 	Te genetic information passed down from our parents
‘ECG’ 	Test where we put stickers on the chest to see a tracing of the heart, which we call an
ECG
‘Fracture’ 	Broken bone
‘Infammation’ 	Swelling/redness
‘Observations’ 	Heart rate and blood pressure
‘Over the counter’ From the pharmacy
‘Positive/negative’ Test result. Avoid using this term and explain exactly what the test shows. Patients may
believe positive means good, negative means bad which may not actually be the case!
‘Clear’ can ofen be used to describe a normal result, e.g. your chest X-ray was clear, your
urine sample was clear.
‘Ultrasound’ 	Jelly scan called an ultrasound
‘Vital signs’ 	Heart rate and blood pressure
➠ 32

-- 47 of 575 --

➠ 33
Resitting the Exam
What may have gone wrong…
Poor choice of recorded cases – lack of complexity. With a straightforward case, you do not give yourself
the opportunity to demonstrate that you have the clinical skills needed for independent UK practice and
so, no matter how well you perform the case, you will not gain top marks and may not even ‘pass’ that case.
Too slow – you do not reach the management plan. Practise your time management. You may be spending
too long on data gathering (for fear of missing something) but to the detriment of the rest of your case. Go
back to basics, e.g. lots of well chosen open questions that help you obtain lots of information quickly, then
group the red fags.
Te doctor talks more than the patient. Consider the many opportunities within the FOCUS model to
engage and involve your patient before giving information.
Missing the subtleties of the consultation and hence the reason for the patient’s attendance.
Te patient leaves not knowing their diagnosis. Even if you are unsure, you should reassure yourself and the
patient with the important negatives, e.g. why it is not a sinister/serious diagnosis. Or share what you need
to do to rule out the sinister/serious and how you will get more information (tests, referral, and colleague
advice) to make the diagnosis.
You do not produce a safe management plan. Ask yourself if this is because you have not considered the
sinister/serious causes of their symptoms.
Poor organisation. Disorganised consultations don’t give a good impression to the examiner or patient.
Try to stick to your consultation model structure and don’t jump between the story, the examination and
information giving.
Still not sure? Tink about the basics – whose needs aren’t being met?
PATIENT NEEDS
• 	Wants to feel understood.
• 	Wants to share everything they have noticed.
• 	To ofoad anxiety and hand over responsibility.
• 	Just in case it may be relevant.
• 	Wants to know what is wrong.
• 	Wants reassurance.
• 	Wants to get better.
DOCTOR AGENDA
• 	To know the facts that will change the management.
• 	Wants clear information so they can make the diagnosis and plan… within 10–12 minutes.
• 	Wants to fx the problem.
• 	Wants the patient to be satisfed with the plan.

-- 48 of 575 --

CHAPTER 1E 	RECORDED CONSULTATION ASSESSMENT
Nuts and Bolts for RCA
Te RCGP produces an excellent online handbook for candidates and, if you are submitting recordings, you
should read this carefully, more than once, as it is a live document and does change relatively frequently.
At the time of writing:
• 	You need to submit 13 cases online.
• 	Tese can be face-to-face, video, audio or any combination of these.
• 	Six population groups/clinical areas MUST be covered:
• 	Child ≤16 years
• 	Maternal or reproductive health problem
• 	Older adult ≥65 years
• 	An acute problem that requires investigation or treatment
• 	A chronic problem
• 	A mental health problem
• 	Tere must be a minimum of two examinations or explanations of examinations.
• 	Other than this, cases can be drawn from any areas of the curriculum but no more than two consultations
from any one area.
• 	Te cases are marked individually by 13 diferent examiners and may be double marked. Tis reduces
any possible risk of bias or ‘halo/horns’ efect.
• 	Scoring – there are nine marks per case and a maximum achievable score of 117 if single marked and
234 if double marked.
• 	Te pass mark is determined by the scores of borderline candidates, so is not a fxed number, but is likely
to be around 143–144, if double marked.
Preparing for the RCA
You can submit cases that have been recorded up to 182 days before the results date, so it makes sense to
start early. Tis will also make sure that you are familiar with your recording equipment so you don’t fnd
that a wonderful consultation cannot be submitted because of avoidable technical problems. You may also
fnd you have some that can be saved for submission, and this will ease any pressure to fnd cases in the
run up to the fnal date.
Note that you cannot ‘double dip’: a case that has been used for a CBD, COT or other workplace-based
assessment, cannot also be submitted for the RCA.
Be organised and have a system so you can easily identify, over time, which are your stronger cases for sub-
mission. Consider using a grid, across the curriculum and including all mandatory cases where you perhaps
colour code or self-score titles of recordings. Ten, when it comes to deciding which cases to submit, you
can identify your preferred recordings more easily.
Consent and confdentiality
It is essential to have appropriate consent from the patient – this needs to be requested beforehand
and checked aferwards. Patients are of course free to withdraw their consent. Some platforms such as
FourteenFish automatically build in consent, therefore you don’t need to verbally repeat it. Whichever
recording method you use, it is your responsibility to check that this is in place for every patient consultation
and upload evidence of this with your workbook.
Should another person appear, seen or heard, within a recording, they must have also given consent.
➠ 34

-- 49 of 575 --

➠ 35
Case Selection and Demonstrating Skills of
Managing Complexity
Case selection
Whether submitting recorded consultations or being given simulated cases within the exam, you need to
demonstrate competence across the curriculum and especially within the mandatory population groups/
clinical areas.
If you are submitting recorded consultations, we recommend that frst presentations provide a greater
opportunity to demonstrate your data gathering. See also our advice within the section ‘Patients returning
for test results’.
Choosing the right cases to demonstrate your skills is critical. Te list of mandatory cases does change
periodically so keep checking the RCGP website. When recording you will have a range of consultations
which ft into these criteria, so which should you choose? How do you maximise the marks you can score?
Te answer to this is pitching the complexity level just right. It is possible to perform a good GP consulta-
tion which you, your trainer and the patient are happy with, but scores poorly in the assessment. You can
also make life very difcult for yourself by tackling very complex cases. Too simple and you are restricting
the available marks you can score. Too complex and you will struggle to complete in 12 minutes. Look for
‘Goldilocks’ cases – where the complexity level is just right.
Balance the combination of clinical challenge and complicating factors to provide you with the best chance
of demonstrating competent skills within the given time.
Remember, the examiner can only mark what they see/hear and so you need to demonstrate your skills. You
have lots of skills you can showcase: risk management, breaking bad news, negotiation, shared management,
the list goes on. How do you demonstrate these?
Patients who are new to you or present with a new problem may well give you the opportunity for higher
marks. Your data gathering will be broader and deeper if, from the outset, you are unfamiliar with the patient
or the problem. Follow-up cases are generally less suitable, although they can be used if you consider care-
fully how to do this. To score well in data gathering, you must elicit NEW information. Summarising the
history back to the patient is not sufcient – either in follow-up cases or in those you may have triaged earlier.
Similarly, in a case in which the patient has perhaps been on a long and complex journey with their problem
already, simply discussing and following a pre-existing plan, e.g. from a consultant, is not likely to gain you
marks for management. Tink about ‘What have I added to this case?’ ‘Has the patient been moved forward
in their journey by your consultation?’
Tis is an exam to demonstrate the competent skills of an independent GP. Terefore, if the same outcome
could have been achieved by the nurse minor illness clinic or practice pharmacist, don’t submit it.
Look at the mark scheme to see how you can achieve the third mark, e.g. for data gathering and clinical
management, your clinical approach should be focused and justifable. For interpersonal skills, there should
be a demonstration of sensitivity and empowering the patient.
How to identify suitably complex cases
First of all, consider the following areas of challenge:
• 	Diagnostics – is the diagnosis difcult to make? Is the condition inherently difcult to manage or are
there lots of diferentials which need to be ruled out?
• 	Situation – is the problem having a signifcant impact? Do the patient’s personal circumstances provide
a challenge or do limitations in services available provide a complication?
• 	Patient – do they have unrealistic expectations, signifcant worries or concerns or communication
difculties?

-- 50 of 575 --

• 	Management – are standard guidelines or protocols unsuitable for this patient? Do the patient’s indi-
vidual comorbidities or polypharmacy restrict your options?
From the above you can see each provides some form of challenge, and each of these could be considered as
a ‘layer’ or a ‘dilemma’ to add into the consultation. For example, a headache case may be very straightfor-
ward, but if the patient has signifcant worries about a brain tumour, perhaps due to prior experience, and
is requesting a CT scan, this will make the case more complex. It is likely the doctor will need to be expert
in discussing risk, reassurance (without inappropriate reassurance), negotiation and shared management to
manage this case well. Te patient’s ICE may have provided extra levels of complexity to the case. Similarly,
you may have a case where there is a mixture of positive and negative red fags. Your gut instinct may be
that the condition is likely to be benign, but there is some nagging doubt to be addressed – or, in other
words, a dilemma. How you discuss your thought process with the patient, and how you manage this risk
and uncertainty, will demonstrate lots of skills.
Tere doesn’t need to be a lot of complexity in the cases. Take the example of a UTI, something we all see very
ofen. A young, ft, female patient with classic symptoms is unlikely to pose much of a challenge. However,
an older patient with CKD, perhaps who has also become a little confused, does have complexity. You must
be aware that the patient’s prior conditions alter the medication you will provide and there may even be a
safeguarding element to consider if the patient lives alone or a carer is struggling to cope. As long as you
voice this to the patient, i.e. ‘as your kidneys no longer work as well as they used to, I would recommend we
choose a slightly diferent antibiotic from usual…’ you can demonstrate that you are taking prior information
into account and managing the patient safely and appropriately.
When analysing your case’s potential for submission, consider if it demonstrates your ability to manage com-
plexity. Ask yourself what makes it a suitable case. Te following are examples to give you inspiration.
However, there are many more potential complexities which may present to a GP.
Diagnostics
• 	Red fags/risk factors – were there elements of risk or red fags which muddied the picture? Have I dis-
cussed risk and/or uncertainty with the patient and explained my thought process well?
Situation
• 	Impact – is the problem having a signifcant impact on the patient and have I helped manage this in my
plan?
Patient
• 	Was the patient vulnerable and did I consider this in my plan?
• 	ICE – did the patient have a false health belief, signifcant concerns or unrealistic expectations which I
have addressed?
• 	Were there compliance issues which I addressed?
Management
• 	Did the patient’s past medical history afect/restrict the options? Have I explained any deviation from
standard care to the patient? Did I explain the difculty conficting problems pose to the patient?, e.g.
heart failure and CKD.
• 	Did the patient’s drug list pose difculty regarding interactions? Did I voice this in my explanation/
management?
If you can answer Yes to any of the above points you are likely to have a case with a suitable level of com-
plexity and you will have had the opportunity to demonstrate GP skills.
➠ 36

-- 51 of 575 --

The RCA Mark Scheme
Make sure you are familiar with the RCGP sheet ‘Generic Grade Descriptors’ (https://www.rcgp.org.uk/
training-exams/mrcgp-exam-overview/mrcgp-recorded-consultation-assessment.aspx#marking).
➠ 37
Data Gathering, Technical and
Assessment Skills
Clinical Management Skills 	Interpersonal Skills
1a Takes a focused history to
allow for a safe assessment to
take place
2a Appears to make a safe
and appropriate working
diagnosis(es)
3a Encourages the patient’s
contribution, identifying and
responding to cues appropriate
to the consultation
1b Elicits and develops relevant
new information
2b Offers appropriate and safe
management options for the
presenting problem
3b Explores where appropriate,
patient’s agenda, health beliefs
and preferences
1c Rules in/out serious or 	2c Where possible, makes 	3c Offers the opportunity
signifcant disease 	evidence-based decisions
re prescribing, referral and
coordinating care with other
healthcare professionals
to be involved in signifcant
management decisions reaching
a shared understanding
1d Considers and/or generates
any appropriate diagnostic
hypotheses
2d Makes appropriate use
of time and resources whilst
attending to risks
3d When undertaken, explains
and conducts examinations
with sensitivity and obtains valid
consent
1e Explores where appropriate
the impact and psychosocial
context of the presenting
problem
2e Provides realistic safety
netting and follow-up
instructions appropriate to the
nature of the consultation
3e Provides explanations that
are relevant, necessary and
understandable to the patient
1f Plans, explains and where
possible, performs appropriate
physical/mental examinations
and tests
1g Appears to recognise the
issues or priorities in the
consultation
When you look at the mark scheme, it becomes much clearer why you cannot gain high marks for simple
consultations. Te straightforward medication check is unlikely to gain any marks in:
1c – Rules in/out serious or signifcant disease.
2a – Candidate appears to make a safe and appropriate working diagnosis.
2e - Provides realistic safety netting and follow-up instructions appropriate to the nature of the consultation.
3d – When undertaken, explains and conducts examinations with sensitivity and obtains valid consent.
3e – Provides explanations that are relevant and understandable to the patient.
So, the maximum possible score for a very easy consultation may be as low as 3.

-- 52 of 575 --

Real patients don’t behave like simulated patients…
When preparing for assessment through simulated surgeries, a common issue that trainees raise is that
actors don’t behave like real patients – and the converse is true as well. For example, all simulated cases that
form part of a consultation skills exam have an important or signifcant psychosocial aspect and, if you
seem interested and ask, the simulator will generally readily tell you what you need. Tis is not always the
case with real patients – and they may misinterpret or not understand questions that you ask. For example,
typical questions that would normally successfully elicit ICE from a simulated patient.
‘What thoughts have you had about [these symptoms]?’
‘Has anything worried you about [x]?’
‘Did you have anything in your mind that you were hoping I might be able to do for you?’
If these are asked in context and with rapport, any simulated patient will tell you exactly what you need to
know. Many ‘real’ patients will respond in the same way, but some may be puzzled that you are asking or
simply say ‘None/nothing.’ You may need to ask again, or diferently, or work hard to demonstrate that you
are interested and that you care about what they say.
Real patients may also talk more, not knowing that there is a 12-minute deadline, so you may need to use
skills to move them on if they are being repetitious or not answering your questions:
‘John – can I just check I’ve got this right so far?’
‘So, to recap – ...’
Using a patient’s name to interrupt and punctuate can be a useful way to get them to pause and listen. You
can read more about this in Te Naked Consultation, Chapter 4 – ‘Building Rapport’ which describes some
techniques to manage a chatterbox patient.
Analysing your cases
Self-analysis of cases is essential to sort the wood from the trees – the cases that you will save, and those that
you will delete. Try using the mark scheme critically. Ask your trainer to do this with you a few times to see
if your own benchmark is in the right place. Remember how the mark scheme works:
0 = Unsafe, or nothing a lay person with no training couldn’t do (e.g. being nice to a patient)
1 = Some skills displayed but inadequate, does not follow accepted practice, does not listen to the patient
2 = Safe but not fuent
To score a 3:
• 	Performance must be competent and safe AND
• 	Tere must be complexity (no 3s for easy cases)
• 	Data gathering and clinical management must be fuent and efcient
• 	You must show that you have picked up cues
• 	Interpersonal skills must demonstrate patient empowerment.
It is common for trainees to be overgenerous with their own ratings – be critical!
Making it easier to collect good recordings
• 	During the consultation, listen carefully and leave typing until the end. Tis takes time and the sound
can be distracting. Jot a few notes by hand as reminders.
• 	If the patient has been triaged so you know in advance what the problem is, look up the NICE guideline
or the relevant section of the BNF so you are aware of your options – BUT be very careful to then tailor
any advice to the individual patient rather than giving them a mini-lecture. Te examiners want to hear
you put guidelines into context.
• 	Always remember that any description of a proposed examination should be solely for the beneft of the
patient, not the examiner. An elaborate description will do little to improve the patient’s understanding
➠ 38

-- 53 of 575 --

➠ 39
of their problem and may well make them more anxious. Tis is likely to mean you lose marks in IPS
and/or CM.
• 	If it’s a face-to-face consultation, a good examination of something that can be done on camera (e.g.
testing for carpal tunnel syndrome) will gain marks. If clothing needs to be removed (in the nappy area
for children age <2, trunks area for male patients age ≥2, bikini area for female patients age ≥2), you
must examine of-camera and should then make a running commentary about what you are doing. Ten
sit down and provide a clear explanation of your fndings.
• 	If the patient has two problems, see if you can complete 1 in the frst 12 minutes rather than trying to
merge them both.
Helping your trainer to help you
It’s your assessment, not your trainer’s, but they can help you to perform at your best. Some discussion
areas might be:
• 	Patient selection. Perhaps you can pick from others’ triage lists?
• 	Timing – useful to have gaps between the 12-minute consultation slots when you are collecting your
recordings.
• 	Ask your trainer to look through and analyse some recordings with you – BUT only those which last no
longer than 12 minutes and where you think you may have scored more than 6 marks. Do not overload
them or ask which you should submit.
Enough is enough!
For those who are perfectionists, it may be tempting to reject cases that are good enough, but not perfect,
in order to gain a very high mark indeed. Tis can be time consuming and stressful. You need to pass safely,
but there are no ‘Distinctions’ awarded for particularly high marks in the RCGP consultation assessment
exams. When you have 13 cases that you are sure will each gain more than 6 marks, we suggest that you stop!

-- 54 of 575 --

♀
♂
Abbreviations
# 	fracture
°C 	degrees centigrade
♀ 	female
♂ 	male
1/12 	1 month
20/40 	20 weeks’ gestation
2WW 	2-week wait
3/7 	3 days
αFP 	α fetoprotein
2° 	secondary
μg 	micrograms
A&E 	accident and emergency department
AA 	Alcoholics Anonymous
AAA 	abdominal aortic aneurysm
AAI 	adrenaline autoinjector
ABC 	airway, breathing, circulation
ABPI 	ankle brachial pressure index
ACE 	angiotensin converting enzyme
ACEI 	ACE inhibitors
ACL 	anterior cruciate ligament
ACR 	albumin creatinine ratio
ACS 	acute coronary syndrome
ACTH 	adrenocorticotropic hormone
ADHD 	attention defcit hyperactivity disorder
ADL 	activities of daily living
AF 	atrial fbrillation
AKA 	also known as
AKI 	acute kidney injury (acute renal
failure)
AKT 	applied knowledge test
ALP 	alkaline phosphatase
ALT 	alanine aminotransferase
AMD 	age-related macular degeneration
AMS 	acute mountain sickness
AMTS 	abbreviated mental test score
ANA 	antinuclear body
APC 	adenomatous polyposis coli
APQ 	alcohol problems questionnaire
APTT 	activated partial thromboplastin time
ARB 	angiotensin receptor blocker
AREDS2 	Vitamin C 500 mg, Vitamin E 400 IU,
lutein 10 mg, zeaxanthin 2 mg, zinc
25 mg and copper (cupric acid 2 mg)
AS 	ankylosing spondylitis
ASD 	atrial septal defect
AST 	aspartate transaminase
AUDIT 	alcohol use disorders identifcation test
AUTI 	atypical urinary tract infection
AV 	arteriovenous
AVSD 	atrioventricular septal defect
β-blockers beta-blockers
β-hCG 	beta-human chorionic gonadotropin
B12 	vitamin B12
BC 	bone conduction
BCC 	basal-cell carcinoma
BCG 	bacillus Calmette-Guérin
BD 	twice daily
BDD 	bone dysmorphic disorder
BM 	blood sugar level
BMD 	bone mineral density
BMI 	body mass index
BNF 	British National Formulary
BNP 	B-type natriuretic peptide
BP 	blood pressure
BPH 	benign prostatic hypertrophy
bpm 	beats per minute
BPO 	benzoyl peroxide
BPPV 	benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
BRCA 	breast cancer
BV 	bacterial vaginosis
Ca2+ 	calcium
CA125 	cancer antigen 125
CAMHS 	child and adolescent mental health
services
CAPRIE 	clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at
risk of ischaemic events
CBD 	case-based discussion
CBT 	cognitive behavioural therapy
CCB 	calcium-channel blocker
CCB 	coercive controlling behaviour
CCG 	clinical commissioning group
CEA 	carcinoembryonic antigen
CF 	cystic fbrosis
CFTR 	CF transmembrane conductance
regulator
CHA2DS2-VASc 	clinical prediction calculator
for estimating risk of stroke in patients
with AF
CHC 	combined hormonal contraception
CI 	contraindication(s)
CIDP 	chronic infammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy
CK 	creatinine kinase
CKD 	chronic kidney disease
CKS 	Clinical Knowledge Summaries (NICE)
CMV 	cytomegalovirus
CN 	cranial nerve
➠ 40

-- 55 of 575 --

CNS 	central nervous system 	ED 	erectile dysfunction
COC/COCP 	combined oral contraceptive 	EEG 	electroencephalography
➠ 41
pill
COPD 	chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COT 	consultation observation tool
CPAP 	continuous positive airway pressure
CPPS 	chronic pelvic pain syndrome
CRB-65 	confusion, respiratory rate, BP, age
– assessment tool for community-
acquired pneumonia
CRC 	Clinical Research Council
CRP 	C-reactive protein
CSA 	clinical skills assessment
CT 	computed tomography
CT CAP 	CT chest abdomen and pelvis
CT KUB 	CT kidney ureters and bladder
Cu-IUD 	copper coil
CURB 	confusion, urea, respiratory rate, blood
pressure
CV 	cardiovascular
CVA 	cerebrovascular accident (stroke)
CVD 	cardiovascular disease
CXR 	chest X-ray
DAAT 	Drug and Alcohol Action Team
DBP 	diastolic blood pressure
DC 	direct current
DEET 	N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide
DEXA 	dual energy X-ray absorptiometry
DH 	drug history
DHEAS 	dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
DKA 	diabetic ketoacidosis
DLA 	Disability Living Allowance
DM 	diabetes mellitus
DMPA 	depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate
DNA 	did not attend (i.e., missed
appointment)
DNACPR 	do not attempt cardiopulmonary
resuscitation
DOAC 	direct oral anticoagulant
DPP4 	dipeptidyl peptidase 4
DRE 	digital rectal exam
DSM-IV 	Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 4th Edition
DUB 	dysfunctional uterine bleeding
DV 	domestic violence
DVLA 	Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency
DVT 	deep vein thrombosis
EBV 	Epstein–Barr virus
ECG 	electrocardiography
ECHO 	echocardiogram
ECP 	emergency contraceptive pill
eGFR 	estimated glomerular fltration rate
eGFRcysC glomerular fltration rate (eGFR) by
standardised cystatin C
ELISA 	enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
ELSCS 	emergency lower segment caesarean
section
ENT 	ear, nose and throat
ESR 	erythrocyte sedimentation rate
ETP 	essential thrombocytopenia
F 	female
F2F 	face-to-face
FAP 	familial adenomatous polyposis
FBC 	full blood count
FBG 	fasting blood glucose
FEV1 	forced expiratory volume in 1 second
FH 	family history
FIT 	faecal immunochemical testing
FOB 	faecal occult blood
FOCUS 	Filter, Opportunity, Context, Unite,
Safety
FODMAPs fermentable oligosaccharides,
disaccharides, monosaccharides and
polyols
FRAX 	fracture risk assessment tool
FSH 	follicle stimulating hormone
FSRH 	Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare
fT4 	free thyroxine
FVC 	forced vital capacity
g 	grams
GAD 	general anxiety disorder
GAD-2 	general anxiety disorder 2-item
GCS 	Glasgow Coma Scale
GCSE 	general certifcate of secondary
education
GF 	glandular fever
GFR 	glomerular fltration rate
GGT 	gamma-glutamyl transferase
GI 	gastrointestinal
GI 	glycaemic index
GLP 	glucagon-like peptide
GMC 	General Medical Council
GnRH 	gonadotropin-releasing hormone
GOLD 	Global Obstructive Lung Disease
GORD 	gastro-oesophageal refux disease
GP 	general practitioner
GQ 	gender-queer
GTN 	glyceryl trinitrate
GUM 	genitourinary medicine

-- 56 of 575 --

HACE 	high altitude cerebral oedema
HAPE 	high altitude pulmonary oedema
HAS-BLEDscore for major bleeding risk
HbA1c 	glycated haemoglobin
HbeAg/Ab hepatitis B e antigen/antibody
HBsAg 	hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV DNA hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid
HCA 	healthcare assistant
Hct 	haematocrit
HCU 	homocystinuria
HCV RNA hepatitis C virus ribonucleic acid
HF 	heart failure
Hib 	Haemophilus infuenzae type B
(vaccine)
HIV 	human immunodefciency virus
HLA B27 	human leukocyte antigen
HMB 	heavy menstrual bleeding
HOCM 	hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy
HONK 	hyperosmolar non-ketotic acidosis
HPV 	human papillomavirus
HR 	heart rate
HRT 	hormone replacement therapy
HS 	heart sounds
HSP 	Henoch–Schönlein purpura
HTN 	hypertension
IBD 	infammatory bowel disease
IBS 	infammatory bowel syndrome
ICD-10 	International Classifcation of Diseases
10th Revision
ICE 	ideas, concerns and expectations
ICP 	intracranial pressure
ICS 	inhaled corticosteroids
ID 	intellectual disability
Ig 	immunoglobulin
IgG 	immunoglobulin G
IgM 	immunoglobulin M
IHD 	ischaemic heart disease
IM 	intramuscular
IMB 	intermenstrual bleeding
IMP 	progesterone-only implant
INR 	international normalised ratio
IPS 	interpersonal skills
IPSS 	International Prostate Symptom Score
IQ 	intelligence quotient
ISMN 	isosorbide mononitrate
IT 	information technology
ITU 	intensive treatment unit
IUD 	intrauterine device (copper coil)
IUS 	intrauterine system (e.g. Mirena)
IV 	intravenous
IVDU 	intravenous drug use
IVF
JVP
K
LA
LABA
LAMA
LARC
LD
LDH
LFT
LH
LIF
LMP
LMWH
LNG-IUS
LOC
LRTI
LTOT
LUTS
LV
M
m
M/R
MASI
MCADD
MCS
MCUG
MDT
MenC
mg
MI
mL
MMR
MRC
MRI
MS
MSK
MSU
MUSE
N&V
Na
NAD
NHS
NICE
in vitro fertilisation
jugular venous pressure
potassium
local anaesthetic
long-acting beta agonist
long-acting muscarinic antagonist
long-acting reversible contraception
learning disability
lactate dehydrogenase
liver function test
luteinising hormone
lef iliac fossa
last menstrual period
low molecular weight heparin
levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine
system
loss of consciousness
lower respiratory tract infection
long-term oxygen therapy
lower urinary tract symptoms
lef ventricular
male
metre
modifed release
Melasma Area and Severity Index
medium chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase defciency
multiple chemical sensitivity
micturating cystourethrogram
multidisciplinary team
meningitis C (vaccine)
milligrams
myocardial infarction
millilitres
measles, mumps and rubella
Medical Research Council
magnetic resonance imaging
multiple sclerosis
musculoskeletal
mid-stream urine
medicated urethral system for
erections
nausea and vomiting
sodium
no abnormality detected
National Health Service
National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence
➠ 42

-- 57 of 575 --

NIPT 	non-invasive prenatal testing
NKDA 	no known drug allergies
NOGG 	National Osteoporosis Guideline
Group
NOK 	next of kin
NSAID 	non-steroidal anti-infammatory drug
NVD 	normal vaginal delivery
NYHA 	New York Heart Association
OA 	osteoarthritis
OCP 	oral contraceptive pill
OD 	once daily
O/E 	on examination
Ofsted 	ofce for standards in children’s
education, children’s services and skills
OGTT 	oral glucose tolerance test
OM 	once in the morning
ON 	once at night
OOH 	out-of-hours GP
OTC 	over the counter
ORBIT-AF Outcomes Registry for Better
Informed Treatment of Atrial
Fibrillation
OSA 	obstructive sleep apnoea
OSAHS 	obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea
syndrome
OSAS 	obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome
PA 	personal assistant
PC 	presenting complaint
PCB 	post-coital bleeding
PCDS 	Primary Care Dermatology Society
PCKD 	polycystic kidney disease
PCN 	primary care network
PCOS 	polycystic ovary syndrome
PCR 	protein creatinine ratio
PCV 	pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
PE 	pulmonary embolus
PEF 	peak expiratory fow
PEFR 	peak expiratory fow rate
PERLA 	pupils equal and react to light and
accommodation
PF 	plantar fasciitis
PID 	pelvic infammatory disease
PIL 	patient information leafet
PIP 	Personal Independence Payment
PMB 	post-menopausal bleeding
PMH 	past medical history
PN 	practice nurse
PND 	paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea
POP 	progesterone-only contraception pill
POI 	primary ovarian insufciency
PPI 	proton pump inhibitors
PR
PRN
PSA
PSC
PSV
PT
PTH
PUD
PV
PVD
QDS
QIP
QOL
QRISK2
RACPC
RCA
RCGP
RCO
RFs
RLQ
RNIB
ROM
RR
RUTI
RUQ
Rx
s/c
SABA
SI
SADQ
Sats
SBP
SCC
SD
SGLT
SH
SHBG
SIGN
SLE
SLR
SMART
SNHL
SNRI
SOB
SOL
per rectum (rectal examination)
as required
prostate specifc antigen
primary sclerosing cholangitis
public service vehicle licence
prothrombin time
parathyroid hormone
peptic ulcer disease
per vaginam (vaginal examination)
peripheral vascular disease
four times daily
quality improvement project
quality of life
algorithm for cardiovascular disease
rapid-access chest pain clinic
recorded consultation assessment
Royal College of General Practitioners
Royal College of Ophthalmologists
risk factors
right lower quadrant
Royal National Institute of Blind
People
range of movement
respiratory rate
recurrent urinary tract infection
right upper quadrant
treatment
subcutaneous
short acting beta agonist
sexual intercourse
severity of alcohol dependence
questionnaire
oxygen saturation
systolic blood pressure
squamous cell carcinoma
standard deviation
sodium-glucose linked transporter
social history
sex hormone binding globulin
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
Network
systemic lupus erythematosus
straight leg raise
self-management and recovery
training
sensorineural hearing loss
serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors
shortness of breath
space occupying lesion
➠ 43

-- 58 of 575 --

SPC 	summary of product characteristics
SSRI 	selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
STI 	sexually transmitted infection
SUFE 	subluxation of the upper femoral
epiphysis
SVT 	supraventricular tachycardia
T1DM 	type 1 diabetes/diabetics
T2DM 	type 2 diabetes/diabetics
T4 	thyroxine level
TAH 	total abdominal hysterectomy
TB 	tuberculosis
TCA 	tricyclic antidepressant
TCI 	to come in
TDS 	three times daily
TENS 	transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation
TFT 	thyroid function test
TIA 	transient ischaemic attack
TIBC 	total iron binding capacity
TSH 	thyroid stimulating hormone
TURP 	transurethral resection of the prostate
TV 	Trichomonas vaginalis
TVUSS 	transvaginal ultrasound
U&E
UC
UKMEC
UMN
UO
UPA
UPSI
URTI
USS
UTI
UV
VA
VC
vs
VTE
VZV
WPBA
WCC
WHO
urea and electrolytes and eGFR
ulcerative colitis
UK medical eligibility criteria for
contraceptive use
upper motor neurone
urinary output
ulipristal acetate
unprotected sexual intercourse
upper respiratory tract infection
ultrasound scan
urinary tract infection
ultraviolet
visual acuity
vital capacity
versus
venous thromboembolism
varicella-zoster virus
workplace-based assessment
white cell count
World Health Organization
➠ 44

-- 59 of 575 --

➠ 45
Disclaimer
Te information or guidance contained in this book is intended for use by medical professionals (specifcally
General Practitioners or General Practitioner Trainees) only and is provided strictly as a supplement to the
reader’s own judgement, their knowledge of the patient’s medical history, relevant manufacturers’ instruc-
tions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Te guidance we refer to within this book is specifcally
for General Practitioners based in the UK, and international readers should refer to local guidance and
advice. Because of the rapid advances in medical science, any information or advice on dosages, procedures
or diagnoses should be independently verifed. Te reader should take into account that the information
within this book is only part of any guidance mentioned and is strongly urged to consult the full text of
up-to-date guidance. Te text is not to replace specialist advice. Te reader is strongly urged to consult the
relevant national drug formulary and the drug companies’ and device or material manufacturers’ printed
instructions, and their websites, before administering or utilising any of the drugs, devices or materials
mentioned in this book. Tis book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable
for a particular individual. Ultimately, it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to make his
or her own professional judgements, so as to advise and treat patients appropriately. We do not accept any
liability or responsibility for any form of loss or any decision made by the reader.

-- 60 of 575 --



-- 61 of 575 --

CHAPTER 2 OVERVIEW
Allergy and Immunology
➠ 47
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum: Allergy
and Immunology
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Angioedema 	‘…. understand how to take an allergy-
focused clinical history and understand
the differentiation of different types by
appropriate testing and referral’
‘Recognising and recording of food and drug
sensitivities’
‘Managing emergencies but supervising the
ongoing management of risk factors and
prescribing‘
‘Prescribing issues (e.g. adrenaline devices)’
Rapid assessment of potentially
acutely ill patient
Negotiation with parent
Resuscitation Council UK guidelines
2 	Venom
Allergy
‘Anaphylaxis’
‘Venom allergy: referral and emergency
management; the role of immunotherapy’
‘Patient safety measures (e.g. systems to
document allergies in the patient record;
Medic Alert bracelet)’
Immunotherapy for venom
allergy – Pharmalgen (dried
bee sting powder used for
desensitisation)
3 	Asthma
Diagnosis
‘Atopy – asthma, eczema and hay fever’
‘The UK has one of the highest prevalences
of asthma, rhinitis and eczema. Allergy-
related conditions may present in a
signifcant number of consultations. The GP
has the lead role in identifying underlying
allergic symptoms that can be diffcult to
distinguish from the range of normality or
other illness’
‘Risk factors including lifestyle,
socioeconomic and cultural factors’
‘Diagnostic features and differential
diagnosis’
Asthma diagnosis – adult and child
4 	Varicella in
Pregnancy
‘Management of specifc situations such as
chickenpox in pregnancy’
Varicella in pregnancy –
Risks to mother
Risks to fetus
Assessing ‘signifcant exposure’
5 	Occupational
Allergy
‘Contact allergies such as hair dye...’ 	Management of allergic contact
dermatitis
Extra 	Allergy and 	Taking an allergy-focused history
Notes 	immunology
in everyday
practice
Management of allergy/immune
conditions
Common and important
conditions – allergy
Common and important
conditions – immune disorders

-- 62 of 575 --

CHAPTER 2 REFERENCES
Angioedema
1. 	NHS inform. https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/skin-hair-and-nails/angioedema. Sep 2020.
Venom Allergy
1. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/insect-bites-and-stings#!scenario:1. Sep 2020.
2. 	Golden D.B., Moftt J., Nicklas R.A. et al. Stinging insect hypersensitivity: a practice parameter update 2011. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2011; 127: 852–4.e1.
3. 	Eich-Wanger C., Muller U.R. Bee sting allergy in bee keepers. Clin Exp Allergy 1998; 28: 1292–8.
4. 	https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs119/chapter/Quality-statement-3-Specialist-assessment-for-venom-
immunotherapy. Mar 2016.
5. 	NICE guidance TA246. Pharmalgen for the treatment of bee and wasp venom allergy. https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ta246. Aug 2017.
Asthma Diagnosis
1. 	Pellegrino R., Viegi G., Brusasco V. et al. Interpretive strategies for lung function tests. Eur Respir J 2005; 26: 948–68.
2. 	SIGN158 British guideline on the management of asthma. Jul 2019. https://www.sign.ac.uk/media/1773/sign158-up-
dated.pdf.
3. 	NICE CKS. Asthma. https://cks.nice.org.uk/asthma. May 2021.
4. 	NICE Guideline NG80. Asthma: diagnosis, monitoring and chronic asthma management. Mar 2021.
Varicella in Pregnancy
1. 	NICE CKS. Chickenpox. https://cks.nice.org.uk/chickenpox#!management. Aug 2018.
2. 	Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Green Top Guideline No. 13. https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guide-
lines-research-services/guidelines/gtg13/. May 2015.
Occupational Allergy
1. 	NICE CKS. Dermatitis – contact. https://cks.nice.org.uk/dermatitis-contact. Jul 2018.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 48
Allergy and Immunology

-- 63 of 575 --

➠ 49
Doctor’s Notes
Emergency walk-in patient
Patient 	Joshua Middleton 	11 years 	M
PMH 	Eczema
Medications 	Oilatum
Hydrocortisone
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Medication review. Eczema controlled. 1 year ago.
Investigations 	No information
Household 	David Middleton 	46 years 	M
Angela Middleton 	43 years 	F
Samantha Middleton 	13 years 	F

-- 64 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Angioedema
Open ☐ 	Hello Joshua, I’m Dr Blount. What happened? Is there anywhere else in your body that doesn’t
feel right? Angela, is there anything else you have noticed?
Flags ☐ 	Joshua, does your breathing feel diferent? Does it feel swollen in your mouth?
Risk ☐ 	Has this happened before?
O/E ☐ 	Because this has happened so quickly, I would like to frst have a closer look at you Joshua; at
the rash and swelling… now your temperature in your ear… now this will squeeze your arm…
now please put your fnger in this gadget… may I look in your mouth please and listen to your
chest? I can see the swelling around your eyes and the rash. You are okay Joshua, but let’s give
you some medicine to get rid of this rash.
History ☐ 	What time did this happen? When did the swelling around the eyes start? Has it got worse since
you lef the football pitch or stayed the same? How is your eczema? Angela, does Joshua have
any other medical conditions? What medicines or creams is Joshua using? Any known allergies?
Who is at home? Any pets?
ICE ☐ 	Joshua, what do you think has caused this? Do you know why this might have happened? What
did you think I may say today? What about you Angela: what has gone through your mind?
Impression ☐ 	Joshua, you have had an allergic reaction, most likely to the peanuts. Te diagnosis is angioedema,
which means swelling from the allergic reaction.
InCLudE ☐ 	It is frightening to hear about other people’s reactions; however, Joshua is doing fne and we will
keep you safe Joshua. It’s helpful to know you have had training with EpiPens and we can inform
the allergy team who prescribe frst EpiPens. What are your thoughts Angela?
Experience☐ 	Have you heard of the word allergy Joshua? What do you know about it?
Explanation ☐ 	Tat’s right Joshua. An allergy means your body doesn’t like something. If you have an allergy
you can have a rash or it can make your breathing difcult if you eat or touch the thing it doesn’t
like. Your friend cannot eat eggs. Lots of people have allergies. I would like you to see the allergy
doctor at the hospital who will likely do tests to confrm the peanut allergy and may suggest
other things you should avoid. For now, please avoid eating and touching all nuts until we know
what is safe.
Empathy ☐ 	Te reaction on your face and skin must have been very frightening and it must be worrying
you that it has not gone back to normal.
Options ☐ 	Because Joshua’s breathing has been normal, the swelling has not got worse since leaving the
pitch and his body measurements are normal, I do not believe Joshua has had an anaphylactic
reaction. Terefore, we could give Joshua an antihistamine and steroid tablets to take the swelling
and rash down. I would expect these to work over the next few hours to a couple of days. Te
other option would be to go into hospital for a drip. I mention this option because, although I
think it is unlikely, there is always a chance the swelling could get worse and afect the breathing.
Recommend ☐ My suggestion, if you feel comfortable with this, is starting the tablets now, staying in the surgery
for the next hour to make sure the swelling does not get worse, then if all is okay go home and
complete the course of tablets, but with the plan that if anything gets worse or you are worried,
then go to hospital. Or do you want to go there now?
Safety net ☐ 	Okay, let’s give you tablets. If in the meantime you feel unwell or diferent, or your tongue or
breathing feels funny, please let me know. If, when you get home, any of these symptoms happen,
call 999. If in the future you ever notice this happen again, call 999 straight away because it can
happen quickly and afect your breathing.
Future ☐ 	We will refer Joshua to an allergy specialist. EpiPens are prescribed initially by the specialist if
they feel it is necessary. Because Joshua has not had an anaphylactic reaction, they may say it is
not necessary. I appreciate allergies can get worse the next time a reaction happens; however, we
should be guided by their expertise because EpiPens can be dangerous. I will let them know in
my referral letter that you have training to use EpiPens. What are your thoughts about the plan?
Is there anything you’d like to ask or clarify?
Specifcs ☐ 	So I’ll make that referral today and if you haven’t received an appointment in the next month
then please let me know. Let’s take you through to the treatment room and I’ll keep popping in
between patients to see you. If you are worried, just call for help.
Allergy and Immunology – 1	
➠ 50

-- 65 of 575 --

➠ 51	
Patient’s Story 	Angioedema
Doctor’s notes Emergency walk-in patient.
Joshua Middleton, 11 years. PMH: eczema. Medications: Oilatum and hydrocortisone.
History 	Mum 	‘Joshua was eating peanuts and he immediately came out in a rash.’
Tis has never happened before. Joshua is well and his eczema is controlled
with emollients alone. He has no other allergies.
Tere is no family history.
Joshua 	You were playing football and felt well.
Aferwards your friend gave you some peanuts. Tis was one hour ago now.
You can’t remember if you’ve had peanuts before.
Within a minute you had come out in a rash and your eyes had started to swell.
Since then, there has been no change.
Your lips are slightly swollen but there is no tongue swelling and your breathing
feels normal.
Social 	Joshua 	You are in the frst year of secondary school.
You live with your parents and older sister.
ICE 	Mum 	You would like Joshua to have some medicine straight away.
You’ve heard of a child who died from a peanut reaction and this thought
frightens you.
You would like to go home with an Epi-Pen but are happy to follow the doctor’s
advice.
You are a district nurse and have had Epi-Pen training.
Joshua 	You feel scared and would like the swelling and rash to go away.
You don’t know what this is.
Your friend has an allergy to eggs which means he can’t have them.
Examination 	Sats 98%. RR 18. HR 90 bpm regular. Temperature 36.8 °C. BP 106/60.
Widespread urticarial rash. Chest clear. Mouth and tongue normal. Mild lip swelling and
mild swelling of the eyelids.
Allergy and Immunology – 1

-- 66 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Angioedema and Anaphylaxis
Doctors are aware that anaphylaxis requires intramuscular adrenaline. However, the misuse of intramus-
cular adrenaline can be dangerous. When faced with a patient with swollen eyes and lips and a generalised
urticarial rash, anaphylaxis is at the top of the diferential diagnosis list.
Angioedema
Angioedema is a sign of a possible frightening medical emergency. Terefore, the above case of an acute IgE-
mediated reaction in the haemodynamically stable patient without respiratory compromise (which is not
an uncommon scenario) may be approached diferently by diferent GPs. GPs are likely to ask themselves:
Do I need to call an ambulance?
Do I need to give intramuscular adrenaline?
Should I give hydrocortisone and chlorphenamine (IM or slow IV) or oral treatment?
Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening risk to airway, breathing and circulation. Adrenaline is required if there
are signs of risk to life.
Te NHS website tells us angioedema ‘sometimes occurs in combination with anaphylaxis …’, which
reminds us that they are two separate diagnoses.
Although many cases of angioedema get better without treatment afer a few days, medication is ofen
used.1
For cases of allergic and idiopathic angioedema, antihistamines and oral steroids can be used to relieve
the swelling.1
Anaphylaxis
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for a useful link to anaphylaxis guidance from
the Resuscitation Council (UK).
Consider keeping a printout of this in your doctor’s bag for reference in real-life
emergencies.
Egg allergy is a contraindication to IM infuenza/MMR/yellow fever/rabies vaccines.
➠ 52
Allergy and Immunology – 1

-- 67 of 575 --

➠ 53
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Marian Harker 	58 years 	F
PMH
Medications
None. Recently registered with little in the medical records.
No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Recent attendance at A&E with inse
for >5 years.
ct sting. No GP consultations
Investigations 	None
Household 	Jennifer Harker 	59 years 	F

-- 68 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Venom Allergy
Open☐ 	I’m really sorry to hear that. Please can you tell me more about what happened.
History ☐ 	Can you describe how the stings looked and felt? And what happened at the hospital?
Flags ☐ 	Did your throat or mouth swell? Any difculty breathing or swallowing? Did you feel dizzy
or pass out? Did you feel nauseous or vomit?
Sense ☐ 	I sense this was a very frightening experience for you. What went through your mind?
ICE ☐ 	You asked for a referral for desensitisation. Was there anything else you hoped for today?
Curious ☐ 	What’s brought you to this area? What was your previous work? Who is at home with you?
What does your partner think? You seem to have had few contacts with health professionals
in the past – have you had any screening checks, for example BP checks or tests for diabetes
or cardiovascular disease?
Impact ☐ 	How has this afected how you feel about your health? And about your move to the country?
Risk ☐ 	Have you or any close family member had severe reactions to stings or bites in the past?
Impression ☐ 	It sounds as if you had a signifcant reaction to the stings, although not a life-threatening
reaction, which we call anaphylaxis.
Experience ☐ 	Have you known or heard of anyone who has had a really serious reaction to bee stings?
Explanation☐ 	Everyone gets stung from time to time but for most people it is a painful nuisance that soon
gets better. Because you had a signifcant reaction, you were right to go to A&E.
InCludE ☐ 	If there were 100 people like you, between 5 and 10 of them might have a more severe
reaction, called anaphylaxis, on a future occasion, although 90–95 would not.
Recommend ☐ So I agree that we should refer you to an allergy specialist and I will do this today. I would
also recommend an Alert bracelet and I will add an alert to your records.
Options ☐ 	I will contact the specialist to fnd out if they advise that we should prescribe an adrenaline
injector pen for you to carry with you whilst waiting for the appointment. If so, we will
prescribe this and our PN will teach you how to use it. At the hospital they may do some
blood tests to fnd out how susceptible you are to a future bad reaction. Especially because
you are so worried about stings, they may suggest desensitisation with a series of injections
of a weak bee venom called Pharmalgen. Tere’s an initial course of injections and then
maintenance injections for up to 3 years. It is usually very efective and would keep you
safe from reacting to bee stings so badly in the future. How do you feel about this?
Empathy☐ 	It can be difcult adjusting to a new way of life – leaving a job that you loved, moving
away from city life and sometimes the countryside can feel isolating. Getting stung by the
bees and the long trip to hospital must have felt very diferent from living and working in
London.
Empower ☐ 	Tere are many local social groups and activities and I am sure there would be some that
would interest you. Tey would ofer opportunities for you to get more involved in the local
area and make some contacts and friends. Some groups would no doubt be really pleased
to make use of your fnancial experience and expertise. Tere are details of local groups on
our notice board in the waiting room.
Future ☐ 	I would also like to arrange some routine blood tests to check for diabetes and heart disease
as well as kidney function. How do you feel about doing this? We could meet again in a week
or two to see how you are feeling and go through the results together. Is there anything that
you’d like to ask?
Specifcs ☐ 	I’ll make the referral today and I’ll contact you if the allergy team advise an adrenaline pen.
Please make an appointment for a blood test, then to see me a week later. Also contact our
secretary if you have not received your appointment letter within the next month.
Safety net ☐ 	For the moment, I would suggest leaving the beekeeping to your partner. If you do get stung,
it is more likely than not that you will have the same sort of reaction as last time which is
unpleasant but not serious but, if your throat or mouth swell, you feel dizzy or vomit, then
call 999.
➠ 54
Allergy and Immunology – 2

-- 69 of 575 --

➠ 55	
Patient’s Story 	Venom Allergy
Doctor’s notes Marian Harker, 58 years. No PMH. No medication. Recent attendance at A&E with insect
stings.
How to act 	Anxious.
PC 	‘I was stung by a swarm of bees last week – my arms were so swollen. Do you think I can be
referred for desensitisation?’
History 	A week ago, you and your partner were checking the hives on your smallholding when the
bees started to swarm. Tis was very frightening. Tey got inside your protective clothing
and you were stung a few times. You were scared but not SOB and your throat and mouth
did not swell. You felt a bit queasy but did not vomit. Over the next 24–48 hours, the stings
on your arms swelled up to 10 cm across, and were red, swollen and itchy. Your arms were
so bad your partner drove you to A&E. Tis was a 20-mile drive away and you were very
anxious on the journey there. At the hospital, they gave you antihistamines and advised you
to see your GP to ask if you needed to be referred to an allergy clinic. You were occasionally
stung by bees as a child but did not have a bad reaction. No one you know, or in your family,
has had anaphylaxis or a severe reaction to stings.
Social 	You were made redundant from your job as a banker in the City a few months ago but
received a good pay-of and have recently moved with your partner to a smallholding in
the countryside where you keep chickens, goats and bees. You were unsure about this move,
but your partner was persuasive. You have a good relationship with her. You have always
been nervous about bees, but your partner had kept them in the past and was keen that
you both get involved in the good life. But – ‘I think it was a mistake moving here’ – you feel
isolated and lonely. You miss your old way of life. Te last straw was that A&E was so far
away, when you used to have a large teaching hospital down the road, although you never
needed it. Your health has always been excellent and you have rarely consulted doctors in
the past. You have ignored invitations for well person screening checks. But now – ‘I feel so
far away from hospital help if I need it.’
ICE 	You are anxious about getting stung again and have read in the newspaper about people
dying from bee stings. ‘Am I going to die?’ You would like to stop beekeeping but your part-
ner is keen to carry on and wonders if desensitisation would help. You have never smoked
and drink minimal alcohol.
Examination 	Nil to fnd.
Allergy and Immunology – 2

-- 70 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Venom Allergy
Most insect stings result in minor local reactions, lasting a few hours to several days but some people will
develop large local skin reactions, or potentially life-threatening systemic reactions including anaphylaxis.
If systemic reaction is suspected or stings are on the face or mucous membranes, risking airway obstruction
or compromised vision, arrange immediate admission. Treat angioedema or anaphylaxis whilst awaiting
emergency transfer.1
Consider referral to allergy specialist if large local reaction or previous systemic reaction.
Whilst patients are waiting to be referred to an allergy specialist:
1. Seek interim advice, e.g. about self-administered adrenaline pens.
2. Provide information about medical bracelets.
3. Discuss avoidance methods.
Explain what to expect at their appointment, e.g.
1. Skin or antibody testing.
2. Consideration of venom immunotherapy.
If at 24–48 hours afer a bite or sting the area of erythema or oedema has developed to be >10 cm, discuss
with an allergy specialist because there is an increased chance of systemic reaction.2
Tell patients that an AAI is not a substitute for emergency medical care – if patients have used it, they should
seek emergency medical attention.2
Beekeepers are strongly exposed to honeybee stings and therefore at an increased risk to develop IgE-
mediated allergy to bee venom. Venom immunotherapy is efective and well tolerated and the majority of
allergic beekeepers can continue beekeeping successfully under the protection of venom immunotherapy.3
Specialist Pharmalgen venom immunotherapy is an option for IgE-mediated bee and wasp venom reactions
if severe or high risk.4,5
General
Many consultations have an opportunity for general health promotion. Tis 58-year-old woman is new to
the practice and does not appear to have had screening for cardiovascular disease or diabetes. She has made
a signifcant career move from a high-fying job in the City to a rural area where she knows few people. Tis
may lead to an adjustment reaction, including anxiety.
➠ 56
Allergy and Immunology – 2

-- 71 of 575 --

➠ 57
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Peter Atkins 	12 years 	M
PMH 	Eczema
Hay fever
Viral-induced wheeze
Medications 	Current medication: 	Oilatum cream PRN
Previous medication: Salbutamol
Spacer
Loratadine
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	3 months ago. Mild eczema – emollients encouraged.
Investigations 	No information
Household 	Rachel Atkins 	40 years 	F
Alexander Atkins 	40 years 	M

-- 72 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Asthma Diagnosis
Open ☐ 	How can I help today? Tell me more about this cough, Peter. Have you had any problems with
your breathing? Are you well at the moment or are you poorly?
Flags ☐ 	Have you had a cold? Any phlegm? Does it hurt anywhere? Has Peter had a fever? When with
your friends, do you run around like they do or do you need to stop more?
Risk ☐ 	I see Peter has hay fever and eczema. Has any family member had asthma at all?
History ☐ 	Any other medical history? Any complications when Peter was born? Or any other medical
problems aferwards? And the medicines that he takes at the moment? Any allergies?
Curious ☐ 	Peter was previously given an inhaler; how ofen does he use it? When did he last use it?
ICE ☐ 	Why was Peter given the inhalers? Peter, why do you think you have a cough? You could be right
Peter; why do you think that? Tell me more about your friend, Peter. Has John ever struggled
with his breathing? Are you worried about your breathing too? And Mum, what do you think
is causing this cough? Are you worried about anything in particular? And, today, what did you
hope we would do at this stage?
Sense ☐ 	I can see you are both concerned.
O/E ☐ 	I would like to examine your chest, Peter, if you can lif up your shirt. Now I will check your pulse
and oxygen level with this gadget. Have you seen this blowing tube (peak fow meter) before? I
will demonstrate. Can you try?
Summary ☐ 	So, Peter, you have been coughing for months but otherwise feel fne. You are worried you could
have asthma like John and would like an inhaler. Mum, you have had many doctors tell you this
is viral wheeze not asthma and therefore thought his cough must be an infection because he has
not been wheezy. Is that correct?
Impression ☐ 	Viral wheeze is very common as a young child but you are older now, Peter, and you feel your
breathing isn’t as good as your friends’ so it sounds like this is asthma. Coughing can be the only
symptom but, Peter, you think you have been wheezy at times too. Asthma is also more likely if
you sufer with hay fever or eczema.
Experience ☐ 	Do you know what asthma is, Peter? What about you, Mum?
Explanation ☐ 	Asthma is where the air tubes in your lungs become narrow so there is less space for the air.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate this may worry you, Peter, afer you have seen John go to hospital.
InCludE ☐ 	We can use inhalers to prevent breathing from getting worse. Tis may be why John has his
inhalers before playing. If you do have asthma, it may be diferent to John’s asthma.
Options ☐ 	Firstly, to confrm the diagnosis our nurse can do some special blowing tests. May I give you a
new blue inhaler, called salbutamol, and a spacer to use it with? You simply put the spacer in
your mouth and spray the inhaler into the other end. Take fve normal breaths for each puf.
It’s likely you will need a brown preventer inhaler too, but ideally we should do the tests before
starting this so the results are more accurate. What do you think? Use the blue inhaler whenever
you feel wheezy, breathless or cough a lot. If this is happening frequently, call me and we can
discuss starting the brown inhaler straightaway.
Empower ☐ 	I’ll write the details down in your asthma plan. Peter, can you keep a diary of each time you need
your blue inhaler? Any questions so far?
Future ☐ 	Please see me again in 2 weeks so we can discuss your blowing tests and potentially start the
brown inhaler. At this point, I can update your asthma action plan so it tells you what to do if
your asthma gets worse.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever struggle with your breathing and need more than 10 pufs of your inhaler at once,
then this is when an ambulance should be called, but I don’t expect that to happen before we
meet again. In the past you may have given Peter ibuprofen Mum? We advise only paracetamol
for anyone with asthma and speaking to a doctor if required, because ibuprofen can make asthma
worse.
Specifcs ☐ 	Please can you arrange to see the nurse as soon as you can, keep your diary and arrange to see
me a week later? So, can you tell me, Peter, when you should ask for help? Yes, and if at any time
your breathing gets worse, you should see a doctor. Tat’s a lot of information that I’ve given you
today. I’ll write down instructions and leave it with the nurse to give you. Any questions?
➠ 58
Allergy and Immunology – 3

-- 73 of 575 --

➠ 59	
Patient’s Story 	Asthma Diagnosis
Doctor’s notes Peter Atkins, 12 years. PMH: eczema, hay fever and viral-induced wheeze.
Medications: Oilatum cream. Past medication: salbutamol with spacer, loratadine.
How to act 	Peter is quiet and requires encouragement from the doctor to speak.
Mum speaks frst if the question is not directed to Peter.
PC 	‘Doctor, Peter keeps coughing every night and it has been going on for months.’
History 	Mum Peter has had a dry cough for months, especially at night and it keeps you awake.
He is not breathless and has no sputum or fever. He has not complained of pain.
He is well and you have not heard him wheeze.
Peter has had no other symptoms for months.
Peter has not used his (very) old inhaler for months, since winter.
He was born around his due date and was always well. Immunisations are up to
date.
No FH. Eczema is mild and controlled with Oilatum.
History 	Peter 	You are ‘fne’. When you play football, you feel wheezy and out of breath.
Your friends can run around for longer. You have had no pain, no fever and no
sputum.
You do not have an itchy nose at present. You recall that you used to use an inhaler.
Social 	No pets. Only child. Parents both smoke ‘but not in the house’.
ICE 	Mum You know that Peter has ‘viral wheeze’ afer multiple doctors have said so.
You are not worried but have brought him here today for antibiotics.
Peter has not told you about his friend John or his worries about asthma.
Peter 	If asked, you think the diagnosis is ‘asthma’.
Mention ‘John has asthma too’.
John is your friend and, if asked about John, tell the doctor that once John ‘went to
hospital because he couldn’t play football’. He was using his inhaler a lot that day
and was sat on the football pitch with it.
You think you need the inhaler like John. You don’t want to have to go to hospital
too. If asked what you understand about asthma, say ‘John uses his inhaler before
he plays football.’
Examination 	Height 140 cm. Peak fow 270 L/min. Chest clear and no wheeze. HS normal. Sats 98%.
RR 17. HR 80 bpm regular. Apyrexial.
Allergy and Immunology – 3

-- 74 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Asthma Diagnosis1–4
Symptoms 	Wheeze, cough, difculty breathing and chest tightness. Especially at night or in the morn-
ing. Variability in symptoms.
Triggers 	Exertion, weather, emotion, pets and hay fever. Screen for occupational asthma. Minus
features which lower the probability: only with a cold, no interval symptoms, moist cough,
dizziness, light-headedness, no wheeze. Also in adults: smoking history, cardiac disease,
voice change.
Atopy 	PMH or FH of hay fever, eczema or asthma.
Medications 	Symptoms with aspirin, NSAID or beta-blockers.
Examination 	May be normal or fndings may include expiratory polyphonic wheeze reduced air entry
low saturations and reduced peak fow levels.
Investigations 	Spirometry and fractional exhaled nitric oxide testing are frst-line tests.
If ongoing uncertainty, peak expiratory fow variability testing for 2–4 weeks.
Specialist tests may include bronchial challenge test with histamine or methacholine
For older children and adults, history alone should not provide a diagnosis.
Supporting the diagnosis
Symptoms.
• 	Positive FeNO level (positive levels according to age). Check prior to initiation of inhaled corticosteroids
when possible (FeNO suppressed by IHCS).
• 	Obstructive spirometry (FEV1/FVC <0.7) and positive bronchodilator reversibility (increase from FEV1
baseline of >12% (child) and in adults also 200 mL volume increase).
• 	Positive peak fow variability (>20%).
Criteria and algorithms for diagnosis according to age are available at NICE.
Also, for treatment see the SIGN asthma management guidance2 and Chapter 19 – Respiratory Health.
Initiating treatment
Use clinical judgement to start treatment at the appropriate step according to symptom severity.
If two or fewer episodes wheeze a week, PRN salbutamol and ‘Consider monitored initiation of treatment
with very-low-dose to low-dose ICS’.2
If three or more episodes of wheeze a week or waking at night with symptoms, or symptoms not controlled
with SABA, consider moving to the next step on the SIGN pharmacological management ladder.2
Refer if diagnosis is uncertain, suspected occupational asthma, asthma is uncontrolled and following poor
response to treatment.
Making a diagnosis in a child <5 years
Under 5s 	Will be based on symptoms, judgement and observation following treatment.
Once >5 years 	Repeat tests every 6–12 months until a diagnosis is confrmed.
Education 	Provide a written asthma self-management plan, training regarding use of inhalers and
information about how to seek help. Provide regular monitoring according to symptoms
and control.
Allergy 	Consider allergy screening. Skin prick testing or IgE tests may be helpful.
➠ 60
Allergy and Immunology – 3

-- 75 of 575 --

➠ 61
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Jennifer Adeyemi 	27 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Nil
Investigations 	No information
Household 	Amire Adeyemi 	29 years 	M

-- 76 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Varicella in Pregnancy
Open ☐ 	How can I help? That must be worrying for you. What has led you to worry about
chickenpox?
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across chickenpox in pregnancy before?
ICE ☐ 	What has been going through your mind about getting chickenpox whilst pregnant? Were
you hoping I would do anything particular today?
Risk/history ☐ When were you spending time with your niece? Would you say you were in close contact
with her for more than 15 minutes? When did she become unwell? Do you know if you
have had chickenpox before? How are you feeling? Have you felt unwell? How has your
pregnancy been going so far? Is this your frst baby?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you are very worried about miscarriage. Is this something you have experienced
before? Or did you have difculty conceiving?
Impact ☐ 	How have these worries been afecting you?
Curious ☐ 	How are things at home? Who do you live with? Are you working at the moment?
SummarICE ☐ 	So you are 16 weeks’ pregnant with your frst baby and have been exposed to chickenpox
afer babysitting your niece. You struggled to conceive so are frightened about any com-
plications, in particular you are worrying about miscarriage or the baby being born with
deformities. You don’t think you have had chickenpox before but aren’t certain. You hoped
I could arrange a test and possibly a scan to check the baby is okay.
Empathy ☐ 	I can tell this baby is very precious so this must be very worrying for you.
Explanation ☐ Chickenpox in pregnancy can cause problems, particularly if the mother hasn’t had it before.
Te chickenpox may make the mother more poorly with complications like pneumonia
and rarely the baby can be afected. However, because you have come in so quickly, there
are things we can do to try to prevent you getting chickenpox and therefore prevent your
baby being afected.
Include ICE ☐ 	Reassuringly, even in babies which are afected by the chickenpox virus, very few develop
problems like deformity and there doesn’t appear to be an increased risk of miscarriage.
Recommend ☐ Usually the frst step would be to check the mother’s immunity to chickenpox – we do
this with a simple blood test. If it comes back that you are immune (which means your
body has fought chickenpox before and is ready to act) then we don’t need to worry – it is
unlikely you will develop chickenpox again. If you aren’t immune, we would refer you to
the hospital to have a special injection which protects you. Tis should help prevent the
infection developing. How does this sound? As long as you don’t develop any symptoms,
you shouldn’t need any extra scans.
Future ☐ 	You will get your detailed scan as normal in 4 weeks. If you did develop a rash or symptoms
you would need to let us know straight away. We would then need to discuss giving you a
medication to help treat the virus with a specialist. Te rash usually develops about 2 weeks
afer exposure so although this seems a while to wait to see if you have caught it, it does
give us time to act.
Empower ☐ 	To help protect yourself, it would be a good idea to avoid seeing your niece until all her
spots have scabbed over. Tis usually takes about 5 days. It’s important to avoid anyone
with shingles too, which is caused by the same virus.
Specifcs ☐ 	So I will ask our nurse to squeeze you in for the blood test this morning. Te lab should
send us the result in the next 48 hours. I will call you then to explain the next step. Is there
anything that I can clarify or explain in more detail for you?
Safety net ☐ 	In the meantime, if you feel unwell with a fever, fu-like symptoms or develop a rash, please
get in touch straight away.
➠ 62
Allergy and Immunology – 4

-- 77 of 575 --

➠ 63	
Patient’s Story 	Varicella in Pregnancy
Doctor’s notes Jennifer Adeyemi, 27 years.
How to act 	Anxious.
PC 	‘I’m worried I may have caught chickenpox from my niece. I’m 16 weeks’ pregnant.’
History 	You are 16 weeks’ pregnant. Two days ago, you were babysitting your 2-year-old niece. You
spent the whole day together and were playing together on the foor a lot. Your sister-in-law
has called this morning to say your niece has come out in a chickenpox rash. You don’t know
if you have had chickenpox or not, but are aware it can be harmful to babies. You want to
know what to do – will the baby be okay? You are anxious about the pregnancy because you
struggled to conceive. You are worried the baby may be deformed if afected by chickenpox
or that it may even cause a miscarriage. So far you have had an uneventful pregnancy – all
seemed well at the dating scan. You feel well at present and haven’t noticed any symptoms.
Social 	You moved to the UK from Nigeria when you were 18. You came to the UK to study History
and English Literature. You met your now husband at a Nigerian Students Society dinner
at university. You are very happy and have a good relationship with your husband. You got
married 5 years ago. You were keen to start a family straight away but have struggled to
conceive so your current (frst) pregnancy is very precious to you. Your husband grew up
in the UK and has a lot of family around. Tey are supportive. You do not smoke or drink.
You are currently not working. Since your research role at the university came to an end you
have been a housewife. Your husband works in pharmaceuticals and so has a little medical
knowledge. He encouraged you to come and get checked out.
ICE 	Ideas: you have probably caught chickenpox from your niece.
Concerns: your baby may be harmed or you may have a miscarriage. You worry your child
may have deformities; you don’t know how you would cope with a disabled child.
Expectations: you hope the doctor can do a test and maybe even arrange a scan to check
the baby is okay. You would like to know how quickly the rash will come out if you have
caught chickenpox.
Allergy and Immunology – 4

-- 78 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Varicella in Pregnancy
Varicella in pregnancy1
Varicella in pregnancy can be serious with consequences to both mother and baby. In Europe, most women
have been exposed to chickenpox and so are less likely to be seronegative, whereas women from the tropics
and subtropics have a higher chance of being seronegative. A clear history of previous chickenpox infection
is reassuring. If there is doubt, a blood test for VZV IgG can be done to check immunity.
Risk to mother:
• 	Severe infection resulting in increased risk of pneumonia, hepatitis, encephalitis and even death.
Risk to fetus:
• 	Scarring of skin, eye and limb deformity, neurological problems, e.g. intellectual disability, microcephaly.
• 	Even in infected fetuses, the risk of fetal varicella syndrome is small, although it has been reported to
occur in gestations from 3 to 28 weeks.
• 	Post-exposure prophylaxis in seronegative women is protective to the fetus.
• 	Tere is no apparent link to miscarriage in the frst trimester.
What is signifcant exposure? Take into account type of varicella rash (e.g. exposed lesions), timing of
exposure (e.g. between 48 hours prior to onset of rash to crusting of lesions) and closeness (e.g. in the same
room for 15 minutes).1
Management2
• 	Clear history of previous infection or proven immunity on testing – reassure.
• 	No previous history of chickenpox or doubt – check VZV IgG (if result available within 48 hours).
• 	If seronegative or unable to get result within 48 hours discuss with specialist about immunoglobulin
prophylaxis.
• 	If seropositive – can reassure.
• 	If chickenpox develops, discuss treatment with a specialist.
➠ 64
Allergy and Immunology – 4

-- 79 of 575 --

➠ 65
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Lacey Archer 	21 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Nil
Investigations 	No information
Household 	No information

-- 80 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Occupational Allergy
Open ☐ 	How can I help? I’m sorry you are having problems. What difculties are you having with
your hands? You mentioned a placement – where is this?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you seem worried about the rash; how has it been afecting you?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had any thoughts about the cause of the rash? What worries have you had about
it? Have you had any thoughts about what I may be able to do to help?
History ☐ 	When did you frst notice the rash? What does your role at the salon involve? How quickly
does the rash come on? Does it itch? Is it sore? Have you noticed a rash anywhere else?
Have you noticed any blisters? Has the skin been oozing at all?
Risk ☐ 	Do you or any family members have a history of skin problems? Do you sufer with asthma
or hay fever? Do any family members have asthma or allergies?
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across anyone else with similar problems, perhaps at the salon?
Curious ☐ 	Have you spoken to your college about the problem? Or anyone at the salon? Why not?
Summary ☐ 	You have recently started a hairdressing placement in a salon and found your hands becom-
ing itchy and sore a day afer you have been there. You wonder if it is from washing up the
hair dye pots and worry it may be work-related because you love hairdressing and don’t
want to have to give it up. You hoped I could give you a cream to make it better.
Empathy ☐ 	It must be worrying to feel your skin may force you to give up your passion.
Impression ☐ 	Looking at the picture I can see areas of dryness and redness on your hands and it appears
you have a condition called contact dermatitis.
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across this term?
Explanation ☐ Tis is a condition in which the skin becomes sore due to touching a chemical. Tis can
sometimes be caused by the chemical causing irritation directly or sometimes the body can
be allergic to the chemical. Because your rash has been coming on a day or two later and it
is very itchy, I think you may have the allergy type. Tis would also ft with your personal
and family history of allergy. Allergy to hair dye is quite common, so you may be right that
this is the cause.
Options ☐ 	It is treatable, but avoiding the chemical is really important.
Empower ☐ 	Can you think of a way that you could avoid touching the dye? Could you wear gloves?
Could you speak to your tutor or mentor? Hair dye allergy is common so I suspect they
will have come across it before.
Recommend ☐ Other things that can help are moisturising creams called emollients. It’s important to put
these on frequently to prevent the skin drying out. You can also use the creams instead of
soap when washing because soap can also make the rash worse. Because the rash is quite
angry, I would also suggest applying some steroid cream, called Eumovate, every night for
a week. Steroid creams should be used in moderation because they can cause skin thinning
and be absorbed into the body over time but, when required, steroid creams are helpful.
What are your thoughts? Do you remember your sister using emollients and steroids for
her eczema? You need to put two fngertips worth of steroid on each hand at night. Allow
this to soak in, then apply the emollient on top – this is called Doublebase. Unfortunately,
it can take many weeks for this rash to settle, but it will get better with time.
Future ☐ 	It would be great if we could speak again in about 4 weeks to see how the rash is settling.
Could you send another photo then for us to look at together? Perhaps you could speak
with your tutor in the meantime to explain about your allergy?
Specifcs ☐ 	So I’m going to prescribe you the deep moisturising and a steroid cream – I’ll send this
through to the pharmacy for you to collect. Please can you book a convenient follow-up
appointment with me. Any questions?
Safety net ☐ 	If the rash doesn’t improve with the week’s course of steroid or at any time you notice it
become more painful, red or weepy, please come and see us straight away because it may
be infected. Also, should the rash spread, please come to see us.
➠ 66
Allergy and Immunology – 5

-- 81 of 575 --

➠ 67	
Patient’s Story 	Occupational Allergy
Doctor’s notes Lacey Archer, 21 years. No other information.
How to act 	Concerned.
PC 	‘It’s my hands – I’m really struggling with this rash since I started my placement.’
History 	You are a 21-year-old hairdressing student who has just started her frst placement in a
salon. To help out, you have been washing out hair dye bowls for the qualifed hairdress-
ers but have noticed irritation to your hands. At frst you thought it was due to washing
your hands so ofen, and perhaps because of the cold weather, but now you aren’t so sure.
Te rash tends to appear a day or two afer you have been touching hair dye so you didn’t
make the link straight away. Usually, the following day you notice a strong itch, then the
skin becomes red and can crack. Tis can happen at weekends and on college days when
you aren’t in the salon. You have tried E45, which soothes the skin a little, but it’s getting
worse. You haven’t tried wearing gloves at work because no one else does and you were
embarrassed to ask. You have started wearing gloves when you go out, more to hide your
hands because the skin is no longer recovering before you go back to the salon.
Your mum has asthma and your sister had terrible eczema as a child, but this has improved
as she has grown up. You do get bad hay fever in summer but manage this with over-the-
counter medication. You haven’t sufered with your skin before.
Social 	You have just moved into your own fat with a fellow hairdressing student. You are happy
at home and happy with your course. You have done really well in the theory parts of the
course.
ICE 	You are starting to wonder if the chemicals you touch at work are causing the symptoms
because when you went on holiday for 2 weeks your hands seemed better. But because the
symptoms tend to appear a day or two later you weren’t sure if this could be related. You are
worried that if you can’t do what other hairdressers do you will have to quit your course.
Tis makes you upset because you love what you do. You hope the doctor can give you a
cream which will help.
Examination
fndings 	See photograph.
Reproduced from Clinical Handbook of Contact Dermatitis (2015), CRC Press. With thanks to Michael P.
Sheehan, Monica Huynh, Michael Chung, Matthew Zirwas and Steven R. Feldman.
Allergy and Immunology – 5

-- 82 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Occupational Allergy
Allergic contact dermatitis1
Allergic contact dermatitis is a type IV (delayed) hypersensitivity reaction which can occur on repeated
exposure to an allergen. Common allergens include hair dye, cosmetics, nail varnish, metals such as nickel
and cobalt (ofen found in jewellery), plants, rubber and cement. Terefore, occupations such as foristry,
hairdressing, catering and those handling metal have a higher incidence.
Tere is an overlap in presentation, and ofen causation, with irritant contact dermatitis. Tis is caused by
direct irritation rather than an allergy. It can be difcult to distinguish between the two and the conditions
may coexist.
With allergic contact dermatitis there is ofen a delay of more than 24 hours before the symptoms appear.
Itching is more predominant than in irritant contact dermatitis. You may get symptoms in areas of the body
not directly exposed to the allergen.
Management1
Removal of the allergen is key. It may take 8–12 weeks of allergen avoidance before the dermatitis settles.
Frequent and liberal use of emollients is required, and topical steroid may be needed – the strength requires
depends on the severity of the rash. Sometimes antibiotics are required if there is superadded infection.
When removal of the allergen is not possible, advise use of gloves, although these should be removed
frequently to prevent sweating. Hands should be washed with soap substitute because water alone or with
soap can exacerbate the rash.
➠ 68
Allergy and Immunology – 5

-- 83 of 575 --

➠ 69	
Extra Notes 	Allergy and Immunology
Allergic conditions are becoming more common so may present in many consultations. Anaphylaxis is life
threatening. Learn how to manage it in primary care. Also:
Taking an allergy-focused history
• 	When and how did symptoms start?
• 	Symptoms – oral, e.g. tongue swelling/tingling lips?
• 	Triggers?
• 	Getting worse on each exposure?
• 	Family history of allergy/atopy.
• 	Patient health belief.
Management of allergy immune conditions
• 	Investigation, e.g. patch test, skin prick, blood tests, challenge testing.
• 	Acute management – doses of adrenaline for diferent ages.
• 	Ongoing management – adrenaline devices, shared management plans (e.g. with school).
• 	Alert bracelets.
• 	Appropriate documentation of allergies in GP notes.
Common and important conditions to be aware of: allergy
• 	Anaphylaxis including doses of adrenaline.
• 	Autoimmune conditions in primary care.
• 	Drug allergies and their mechanisms.
• 	Food allergies including milk allergy.
• 	Occupational allergies (latex, hair dye, metals, plants).
• 	Pollen food syndrome.
• 	Types of allergic reaction – immediate, delayed, possible mechanisms.
• 	Venom allergy.
Common and important conditions to be aware of: immune disorders
• 	Immune defciency states, e.g. HIV, chemotherapy, inherited.
• 	Antibiotic use and immunisation of people with immune defciency.
• 	Interpreting antibody results, e.g. chickenpox in pregnancy, rubella, hepatitis B and C.
• 	Immunisation schedule for children.
• 	Immunisations for occupational medicine, e.g. health workers.
• 	Needlestick injuries – risks of hepatitis B and C and management.
• 	Kaposi’s sarcoma.
• 	Transplant medicine (heart, lung, liver, kidney, cornea).
• 	Indications for and consequences of transplantation, e.g. immunosuppression.
Allergy and Immunology – 5

-- 84 of 575 --



-- 85 of 575 --

CHAPTER 3 OVERVIEW
Cardiovascular Health
➠ 71
Cases in this chapter 	Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Cardiovascular Health
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Chest Pain of Recent
Onset
‘Risk factors for coronary heart
disease’ ‘Manage cardiovascular
emergencies in primary care’
Differential diagnosis of chest pain
NICE Guideline CG95. Recent-
onset chest pain of cardiac
origin: assessment and diagnosis.
November 2016
2 	Heart Failure 	‘Monitor and manage the care
of patients with long-term
cardiovascular conditions such
as…chronic heart failure’
NICE Guideline CG187. Heart
failure: diagnosis and management.
October 2014
NICE Guideline NG106. Chronic
heart failure in adults: diagnosis and
management September 2018
3 	Atrial Fibrillation 	‘Monitor and manage the care
of patients with long-term
cardiovascular conditions such
as…. atrial fbrillation’
NICE CKS
https://cks.nice.org.uk/atrial-
fbrillation
May 2021
4 	Hypertension 	‘Consider involving the patient
in self-monitoring and self-
management’
‘Advise your patients appropriately
regarding lifestyle interventions’
NICE Guideline NG136.
Hypertension in adults: diagnosis
and management. August 2019
5 	Angina 	‘Demonstrate an understanding
of the importance of risk factors,
including chronic kidney disease, in
the diagnosis and management of
cardiovascular problems’
NICE Guideline CG126. Stable
angina: management. August 2016
Extra
Notes
Managing the
Stroke Risk in Atrial
Fibrillation
CHA DS VASc	2 	2
ORBIT-AF
DOACs
Hypertension 	Referral to cardiology
White coat HTN
Resistant HTN

-- 86 of 575 --

CHAPTER 3 REFERENCES
Chest Pain of Recent Onset
1. 	NICE Guideline CG95. Recent-onset chest pain of cardiac origin: assessment and diagnosis. Nov 2016.
Heart Failure
1. 	NICE Guideline NG106. Chronic heart failure in adults: management. Sep 2018.
2. 	NICE Guideline CG187. Acute heart failure – diagnosis and management. Oct 2014.
3. 	Heart.org. Classes of Heart Failure. https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/heart-failure/what-is-heart-failure/
classes-of-heart-failure. Oct 2020.
Atrial Fibrillation
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/atrial-fbrillation-pro. May 2021.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG196. Atrial fbrillation: diagnosis and management. Jun 2021. Patient decision aid.
3. 	NICE CKS. Atrial Fibrillation. http://cks.nice.org.uk/atrial-fbrillation#!scenario. May 2021.
Hypertension
1. 	He F.J., Li J., MacGregor G. Efect of longer term modest salt reduction on blood pressure. Cochrane systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ 2013; 346: f1325.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG136. Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management. Aug 2019.
3. 	Whelton P.K., Carey R.M., Aronow W.S. et al. ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/
PCNA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults:
Executive Summary: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2018; 138: e426–e483.
4. 	NICE Guideline NG28. Type 2 diabetes in adults: management. Dec 2020.
5. 	https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng17/chapter/1-recommendations. Dec 2020.
6. 	NICE Guideline CG82. Chronic kidney disease in adults: assessment and management. Jan 2015.
Angina
1. 	NICE Guideline CG126. Stable angina: management. Aug 2016.
2. 	http://patient.info/doctor/stable-angina-pro. Accessed 4 August 2021.
3. 	NICE Guideline CG94. Unstable angina and NSTEMI: early management. Nov 2013.
4. 	Bosch J., Lonn E., Pogue J. et al. Long-term efects of ramipril on cardiovascular events and on diabetes: results of
the HOPE study extension. Circulation 2005; 112: 1339–46.
Managing the Stroke Risk in Atrial Fibrillation
1. 	NICE Guideline NG196. Atrial fbrillation: diagnosis and management. Jun 2021.
2. 	https://www.practical-haemostasis.com. Risk assessment algorithms: atrial fbrillation and the risk of bleeding.
3. 	NICE CKS. Atrial Fibrillation. http://cks.nice.org.uk/atrial-fbrillation#!scenario. May 2021.
Useful Resource
https://www.mdcalc.com/orbit-bleeding-risk-score-atrial-fbrillation for an online tool to calculate the ORBIT-AF score.
Hypertension
1. 	NICE Guideline NG136. Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management. Aug 2019.
2. 	Beckett N., Peters R., Fletcher A.E. et al. Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years of age or older. N Engl J Med
2008; 358: 1887-98.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 72
Cardiovascular Health

-- 87 of 575 --

➠ 73
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Mary Jones 	45 years 	F
PMH 	New patient questionnaire: smoker, BMI 40.2, three children.
No further information.
Medications 	No information
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No information
Investigations 	No information
Household 	No household members registered

-- 88 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Chest Pain of Recent Onset
Open ☐ 	Please tell me more about the pain, from when you frst noticed it until now. How did it
start? Please describe the pain to me? And tell me about any other symptoms.
Flags ☐ 	What are you doing when the pain comes on? Do you feel sick, sweaty or short of breath?
Have you injured your neck? Any headache? Any weakness or tingling in the arms?
Risk ☐ 	Do you sufer with raised BP or cholesterol? Has a family member under the age of 65 had
a problem with their heart? Do you smoke?
History ☐ 	Do you have any other medical conditions? Or take any medications?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think might be going on? I’ll be explaining my recommendations today. Apart
from prescribing co-codamol, was there anything else that you were hoping I would do
today? What has been on your mind about this pain? Any other worries?
Impact ☐ 	Has this pain stopped you from doing anything?
Sense ☐ 	I’m sorry that I have kept you waiting. I can see that you are in a rush; however, I am con-
cerned about your pain.
O/E ☐ 	May I examine your BP in both arms, pulse and heart rate, take your temperature and listen
to your heart please?
Summary ☐ 	So you’ve had this pain a few times, initially when quite active, but this time it started whilst
you were resting. It has now been present for 30 minutes in your chest and neck and you
feel nauseous and sweaty.
Impression ☐ 	I am concerned that this pain is from your heart (pause); this could be a heart attack.
Explanation ☐ A heart attack is where a vessel to the heart becomes blocked and the lack of blood fow
causes the pain.
InCludE ☐ 	I see why you thought it was a neck problem. However, pain from your heart is commonly
felt in the neck.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate this is very frightening and completely unexpected.
Recommend ☐ I’d like to take you through to our treatment room where we can do a heart tracing called
an ECG. I’m going to ask the receptionist to call an ambulance. I appreciate this sounds
frightening, although if the pain is coming from your heart it is treatable. But we must not
delay this treatment. I’d like to give you an aspirin tablet to help with the blood fow.
Empower ☐ 	I appreciate you need to go to your son. However, I must tell you what is at risk here. You
need to go to the hospital now otherwise your life could be in danger.
Options ☐ 	I’m sorry. Do you have anyone our receptionist can call? Your husband? We will keep a
close eye on you and have you seen by hospital staf straight away.
Future ☐ 	At the hospital I expect they will do a blood test and they may take you to have a procedure
which looks at the vessels to the heart. Do you have any questions? Sometimes when people
are new to an area, they can feel isolated. I’d really like to catch up with you and see how
you are.
Specifcs ☐ 	When you are discharged from the hospital, please make an appointment to see me so that
we can discuss what has happened, make sure your medication is up to date and answer
any questions you might have.
Safety net ☐ 	I expect the hospital doctors will treat your heart to prevent this from happening again.
However, if you ever notice similar symptoms again – feeling breathless or in pain – then
call 999.
➠ 74
Cardiovascular Health – 1

-- 89 of 575 --

➠ 75	
Patient’s Story 	Chest Pain of Recent Onset
Doctor’s notes Mary Jones, 45 years. New patient. BMI 40.2. Smoker. Tree children.
How to act 	You are in a rush. Tell the doctor this as he/she is running late.
You want to reassure the doctor it’s just a pulled neck.
PC 	‘Doctor, I’ve got a pain in my neck.’
History 	Te pain in the upper lef chest and neck has now been present for 30 minutes. You had
not rushed here and this time it started 5 minutes afer you arrived at the surgery.
It feels like something is pressing. You feel nauseous, sweaty and slightly SOB. You can’t
think of anything that takes it away. It just comes and goes but you think movement makes
it worse because whenever you are doing something it comes on.
You also had the same pain 2 days ago when you were in the garden, but it went away afer
5–10 minutes when you rested.
You have had this pain a few times in the past 2 weeks.
For example, when running upstairs or watching television.
Your old GP gave you co-codamol for back pain so you would like this for your neck.
Your father died when you were a child due to his heart.
Social 	Mother of three. You have moved areas as your husband has been relocated. You have not
found a job and used to work in a local tea room. Your husband works in the building
supplies industry. You smoke 10 a day. You drink alcohol rarely.
ICE 	You believe you have pulled your neck. You have not made any connection with the heart.
You would like a prescription for co-codamol and you will return another time if the doctor
suggests anything else.
You can’t go to hospital now. You have to go and watch your son in a school play.
You would just like the codeine. However, when the doctor explains the seriousness of the
problem, you become upset and agree.
Examination 	HS normal. HR 124 bpm regular. Sats 97%. RR 18. BP 130/80 in both arms.
Temperature 36.5 °C.
No neck or cervical spine tenderness and full range of movement.
Cardiovascular Health – 1

-- 90 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Chest Pain of Recent Onset
Beware: cardiac pain at radiation sites + nausea/vomiting/sweating especially in women/elderly/diabetics.
Do they need to go to hospital today?
Yes, if history of ACS within 72 hours1, or if the patient shows signs of acute decompensation or other
complications, or if clinical judgement concludes a troponin level is required.
Otherwise refer to RACPC.
Do I need to call for an ambulance?
Yes, if current chest pain and consider in all possible ACS.
Always refer to full guidance.
Differential diagnosis
ACS: 	Pain >10 minutes or increasing frequency or onset with less activity or at rest.
Dissection: 	Sudden tearing pain radiating to the back between the scapulas.
Pericarditis: 	Sharp, relieved by sitting forward ± radiation, fever, cough and arthralgia.
Acute heart failure: 	Orthopnoea and breathlessness.
Arrhythmias: 	Associated with palpitations and syncope.
PE: 	SOB, tachycardia, hypoxia, ± haemoptysis ± leg swelling± risk factors for VTE.
Pneumothorax: 	Risk factors include injury, tall male and COPD.
Pneumonia: 	SOB, fever, purulent sputum, cough ± pleuritic pain. Check the CRB65 score.
GORD/PUD: 	Belching, refux and sharp/burning pain ± melaena.
MSK causes: 	From Tietze’s, costochondritis or rib fracture. Recent activity, tender.
Anxiety: 	Tight chest, tingling in fngers, feeling of needing to breathe.
Referred thoracic pain: Back pain with possible back pain red fags.
When to give oxygen? 	Sats <94% and not at risk of carbon dioxide retention (aim for 94–98%).
Sats <88% and with COPD history (aim for 88–92%).
➠ 76
Cardiovascular Health – 1

-- 91 of 575 --

➠ 77
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Brendon Phillips 	74 years 	M
PMH 	Irritable bowel syndrome
Barrett’s oesophagus
Severe mitral valve regurgitation
Heart failure
Essential hypertension
Medications 	Bisoprolol 1.25 mg
Ramipril 2. 5 mg
Furosemide 40 mg
Allergies 	NKDA
Consultations 	6 months ago for ankle oedema: GP prescribed 40 mg furosemide
OD.
Investigations 	1 year ago:
Echo: ejection fraction 55%, severe mitral valve regurgitation.
ECG: sinus rhythm 70 bpm.
Bloods: FBC, U&E, LFT, TFT, HbA1c, lipids – all normal.
Chest X-ray: mild pulmonary congestion, cardiomegaly.
Household 	No household members registered

-- 92 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Heart Failure
Open ☐ 	What have you noticed about your breathing? When does this afect you? How is your breathing
with exercise? At night? Anything else you have noticed? How quickly has it changed?
Flags ☐ 	Any chest pain? Do you feel your heart beating in an unusual way? Coughing? Phlegm or blood?
Whistling in your chest? Swelling or pain in your ankles/legs? Weight loss? Fever or sweats? How
many pillows do you sleep with? Do you suddenly feel breathless at night?
Risk ☐ 	Any heart or breathing problems or blood clots in the family? Have you smoked? Or drank much
alcohol? Have you travelled or been of your feet recently? Any exposure to asbestos or animals?
History ☐ 	Tell me about your medical history? How do you take your medicines? How do you spend your
days. Is anyone else at home? Do you enjoy anything?
Impact ☐ 	How is this afecting you? What other changes have you had to make? How is your mood?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you feel quite concerned about this change in health.
ICE ☐ 	What do you think is causing the problem? Is there anything you have been worried about? I’ll
be making many suggestions, but did you have any particular help in mind?
Curious ☐ 	When you say damaged, what have other doctors explained? What have you read?
O/E ☐ 	I would like to bring you in to examine you: your hands, BP, pulse, oxygen level, breathing rate,
temperature, listen to your heart and lungs, the veins in your neck, feel your tummy and look at
your legs. Would that be okay? Are you free to come in at 3 p.m? I’ll talk through what I think
is going on so you can be considering your options before we meet.
Summary ☐ 	To summarise, you were prescribed medication for your heart a year ago, but over the past 4
months your breathing has worsened causing worry about your heart.
Impression ☐ 	We know you have a leaky valve that afects your heart. Your BP is slightly raised and this may be
putting additional strain on the heart. I believe it is your heart that is causing your breathlessness
and swollen ankles. What are your thoughts?
Explanation ☐ 	Te mitral valve is in the lef side of the heart, which receives blood from the lungs and pumps
blood to the body. Your valve doesn’t close fully, causing blood to leak backwards. Te term
heart failure has a frightening name but is a common condition where the heart doesn’t pump
efciently. Fluid ofen gathers in legs and lungs. Do you have any questions?
Empathy ☐ 	Connecting what you have read and heard from your mother, and with a diagnosis which sounds
scary and not being able to walk your dog, it sounds like this has been tough? (Pause)
InCludE ☐ 	You’re right; rheumatic fever may have caused it. Being told your heart is not right will give you
a feeling of doom and fear. Let’s talk options to improve your heart.
Recommend ☐ Firstly, up-to-date blood tests would be helpful, e.g. to check anaemia isn’t contributing to
breathlessness, and your kidneys are coping with the water tablet, and I’d like to increase your
ramipril to 5 mg as this can help both the BP and the heart. However, we will need a further
kidney blood test 2 weeks later to check your kidneys are happy. How does this sound? Also,
an up-to-date ECG can check the heart rhythm is okay. Is that also possible? Ten I would like
to put all this information together and ask the cardiologist to see you. I would expect them to
make further changes to medications and talk to you about surgical options. How would you
feel about seeing the cardiologist?
Specifcs ☐ 	So, today you are coming in to see me at 3 p.m. When you get here, please ask reception to book
you in for a blood test and ECG, followed by a call with me to discuss those results. I will then
write to cardiology.
Safety net ☐ 	I do not expect this to happen but, if you ever suddenly feel very breathless or get chest pain,
you need to call 999. If your symptoms change or worsen whilst you are waiting to speak to me
again, seek help through us or 111. Do you have any questions?
Include ICE ☐ 	Together we can make this problem much better for you and you’ll have some options to choose
from, so stay positive if you can. I’ll see you at 3 p.m.
➠ 78
Cardiovascular Health – 2

-- 93 of 575 --

➠ 79	
Patient’s Story 	Heart Failure
Doctor’s notes Brendon Phillips, 74 years. PMH: IBS, Barrett’s oesophagus, severe mitral valve regurgita-
tion, heart failure, essential hypertension. Medications: bisoprolol 1.25 mg, ramipril 2.5 mg,
furosemide 40 mg.
How to act 	Concerned for your health.
PC 	‘My breathing is not very good doctor.’
History 	You used to enjoy hiking but, 18 months ago, you noticed you could not manage the same
strenuous walks. You had tests and the doctor had said you needed medication to help with
the fow through your heart. In the past 4 months, you have gradually noticed that normal
life is more difcult, due to your breathing getting worse around the home, for example
afer climbing the stairs you feel tired and breathless at the top and you generally feel more
tired. You have given up walking the dog around the block and your neighbour helps with
this. You have noticed a return of the ankle swelling. Your legs are not swollen and you have
no chest pain. No palpitations.
You have noticed it is easier to sleep with three pillows but have had no PND recently.
You have noticed that you are wheezy sometimes when walking.
You have had no cough or weight loss and have been well with no temperature.
You have no RFs for CVD or VTE.
You have never smoked or had any exposure to asbestos or animals/birds.
No recent travel. No drenching sweats.
You were born in India where your parents worked until you were 14 years old, then your
family moved back to the UK.
Social 	You retired 3 years ago from your job as a surveyor.
Divorced 10 years ago and have since lived alone.
You have a good network of friends who share your interests. You go to play bowls and
can still do this. You enjoy listening to sport and reading the newspaper. You have fun at
the pub quiz in a village where you know everyone. So, if not thinking about your health,
you’re content with life. You rarely see your children as they are busy in London.
ICE 	You have also done some reading since the ultrasonographer last year mentioned your valve
is afected. You ask ‘Is my heart damaged?’ You remember your mother telling you that you
had rheumatic fever as a child and you have read that this can afect the valves.
Te prospect of a problem with the heart has given you a sense of doom that you can’t
explain. You are not sure what the GP may suggest today.
Examination 	Pansystolic murmur heard at the apex. Chest: bi-basal crackles in lower zones. HR 72 bpm
regular. RR 15. Sats 96%. Apyrexial. BP 158/94. No hepatomegaly. Ankle oedema to lower
calf. JVP 4 cm. No palpable thyroid. No lymphadenopathy. No clubbing.
Cardiovascular Health – 2

-- 94 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Chronic Heart Failure
Refer to full NICE Guideline NG106. Chronic heart failure in adults: management. September 2018.
History 	Dyspnoea, exercise tolerance for NYHA class, PND. Alcohol, nutrition and mood.
Bloods FBC (anaemia), U&E and LFTs (baseline/reliability of BNP)
TFTs (secondary cause), lipids and glucose (secondary prevention).
BNP if no previous MI.
Other tests 	Urinalysis (protein). ECG (ischaemia/LV hypertrophy). CXR (HF and malignancy).
Consider spirometry if diagnosis uncertain.
Echo 	Systolic and diastolic function and valve disease.
BNP 	BNP <100 pg/mL = NT-proBNP <400 pg/mL – low clinical suspicion of HF.2
BNP >400 pg/mL = NT-proBNP >2000 pg/mL – raised clinical suspicion of HF.2
Beware of factors that may infuence the BNP level including medications, comorbidity
(e.g. renal, liver, diabetes), acute illness, obesity and age.
2-week echo 	if previous MI + suspected HF or BNP >400 pg/mL.1
6-week echo 	for initial diagnosis and BNP between 100 and 400 pg/mL.
If valve disease present, follow cardiology advice.
Refer back 	if NYHA class IV, not responding to treatment2 and admit if can’t be managed at home.
Health advice 	Smoking, alcohol, salt, cardiac rehabilitation, fu and pneumococcal vaccine.1
Weight – report if 2 kg ↑ in 2 days. Consider referral to a rehabilitation programme.1
Medication for left ventricular systolic dysfunction2,3
For each medication check licensing (for indication), contraindications and interactions.
Diuretics – titrate up or down according to congestion symptoms.1
ACEI – titrate to maximum tolerated dose. If intolerant consider an ARB.
Measure creatinine, U&E (e.g. 2 weeks) afer each dose increment.1
Caution includes valve disease – await cardiology advice.
β-blockers – increase slowly and check HR and BP afer each increment.
Consider even if elderly, diabetic, COPD, PVD and ED.
Switch previous β-blockers to one licensed for HF.1
ARB – if intolerant of ACEI and monitor creatinine/U&E.1
Hydralazine with nitrate – seek specialist advice. An option if intolerant of ACEI/ARB.1
Spironolactone, e.g. if NYHA class III–IV.
Following an MI – initiated within 3–14 days preferably afer ACE.1
Monitor creatinine/U&E – for hyperkalaemia and ↓renal function.1
Digoxin – if worsening HF despite 1st and 2nd line Rx and seek specialist advice.
Aspirin 75 mg if indicated for vascular disease.
CCBs – Amlodipine may be considered if coexistent HTN or angina.1
HFPEF 	Heart failure with preserved ejection fracture (e.g. due to diastolic dysfunction).
Diagnosis symptomatic, ↑ BNP (other causes excluded) and normal ejection
fraction on echo.
Symptomatic Rx diuretics for congestion. Treat comorbidities and seek advice.
➠ 80
Cardiovascular Health – 2

-- 95 of 575 --

➠ 81
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Elizabeth Alderton 	65 years 	F
PMH 	Hypertension
Medications 	Amlodipine 5 mg
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Te nurse has added Elizabeth to your list afer a routine ECG
for HTN.
Investigations 	BP today 128/72. Recent blood tests normal (U&E, glucose,
cholesterol).
Household 	Patrick Alderton 	67 years 	M

-- 96 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Atrial Fibrillation
Impression ☐ 	Tank you for waiting. I can see you are keen for your results so may I suggest that we discuss
them briefy, then go into detail about your health. Is that okay? Your ECG has shown an irregular
heart beat. (Pause). Tis is called atrial fbrillation or AF for short and it is very common.
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across atrial fbrillation?
Explanation ☐ 	Your BP may have been a trigger. Atrial fbrillation can cause problems if we don’t control it. But
that’s what I’d like to help you with to keep you healthy and safe.
Sense ☐ 	I can see this is unexpected and you’re keen to know what needs to be done. But, in order to
make the right decisions for you, can we start at the beginning; so we can make a plan tailored
to you?
Open ☐ 	Please take me back to any events that led you to having this ECG. Had you experienced any
symptoms that you now wonder may be related?
Flags ☐ 	Have you had any pain, dizziness or breathlessness? Faints, visual changes? Episodes where your
arms or leg felt weak?
History ☐ 	Does amlodipine suit you? Any other tablets? Ibuprofen? Tell me more about you.
Risk ☐ 	How much alcohol and cafeine do you drink? Any recent illness, fever, cough or weight loss?
O/E ☐ 	Please may I examine your heart and lungs and take your BP?
Summary ☐ 	So, to summarise, a routine ECG for HTN has detected AF. You had no symptoms.
Explanation ☐ 	Within the heart, an electrical current makes your heart muscles pump. In AF the electrical
current is disorganised. Te electrical pulse starts at the top of the heart in the atria. When this
happens in an uncoordinated way, the atria twitch, or fbrillate as we call it, hence the name AF.
Any questions? Te heart can beat fast and inefectively, so medication is given to prevent this.
Te risk of AF is that clots can form and then cause problems, e.g. strokes. We can prevent this
by using medication to thin the blood.
Options ☐ 	So the treatment for AF is in two stages. Firstly, a tablet to slow down the heart rate if needed.
Your resting rate is normal, but we need to monitor it. If it goes fast we will need to slow it down.
Secondly, we need to discuss whether to make your blood less likely to clot.
Recommend ☐ As high BP also increases stroke risk, I recommend a tablet to reduce clotting. Have you come
across drugs such as warfarin or apixaban?
Curious ☐ 	Warfarin was used until recently for AF. What was your uncle’s experience of warfarin?
Options ☐ 	Aspirin is no longer recommended as it does not work well; the stroke risk remains high.
All blood thinners increase the risk of bleeding from the stomach, brain or nose. However, apart
from your BP, which is controlled, you are well and may feel the benefts of preventing a stroke
outweigh the risks. A newer type of drug is now recommended as frst choice - apixaban. It’s
important to take it daily but no blood tests are required.Tis is a lot of information. What are
your thoughts? I can print out a patient decision aid leafet produced by NICE to help you decide
if you like.
Future ☐ 	So shall we try apixaban? It is taken twice a day. If you experience any persistent nausea with
this tablet, let me know. A great way to monitor your heart is if you have a watch that does this
and we could look at results together when you’ve been exerting yourself. Or we can arrange a
24-hour ECG monitor? Do you have a preference? If we fnd we need to slow the heart, we could
consider swapping your amlodipine to diltiazem, a cousin tablet of amlodipine, which slows
the heart rate and reduces BP. Or we could start a β-blocker, alongside the amlodipine which is
already working well for you.
Specifcs ☐ 	So please can you arrange a call with me in a couple of weeks’ time, afer you’ve had a chance to
exercise and monitor your heart rate with your watch. Please keep the readings for me. If you
notice HRs over 100 frequently please call sooner.
Empower ☐ 	Other things that you can do include decreasing cafeine and alcohol intake.
Safety net ☐ 	Te apixaban is very protective, however if you ever notice your vision changes or arms or
legs feel diferent or weak, you must call an ambulance as these may be signs of a stroke. If you
ever feel lightheaded, breathless or have chest pain, this may be due to AF, so please seek help
straightaway.
➠ 82
Cardiovascular Health – 3

-- 97 of 575 --

➠ 83	
Patient’s Story 	Atrial Fibrillation
Doctor’s notes Elizabeth Alderton, 65 years. PMH: hypertension. Medication: amlodipine 5 mg.
BP today 128/72 and a routine ECG.
How to act 	Very pleasant.
PC 	‘I had an ECG with the nurse and he said I had to wait to see you. Is something wrong?’
History 	Afer a series of home BP readings you were recently diagnosed with HTN.
You were told to get an ECG but you have been on holiday.
You feel very well and are very active.
You have had no symptoms.
Your father sufered with high BP but you have no other FH.
You feel well on amlodipine 5 mg.
Social 	You are a librarian. You live with your husband and you have two dogs.
You walk the dogs daily and enjoy swimming.
You have never smoked and you drink 14 units of alcohol a week.
You enjoy cofee.
You ofen go on holiday.
ICE 	Afer being informed you have AF you are keen to know the plan.
‘What does that mean … is it dangerous?’ Ten ‘So what needs to happen?’
You have never heard of atrial fbrillation.
If the doctor talks about anticoagulants, say: ‘My uncle was on warfarin. You need blood
tests. Can’t I take aspirin?’
Your uncle had lots of nose bleeds afer which his nose would need packing.
You will not take warfarin under any circumstances due to the blood tests.
You hate needles and have another holiday planned.
Once aware of the risks/benefts of a DOAC, this is your preferred option.
Examination 	HS normal. HR 80 bpm irregular. Chest clear. BP 120/70. Please see ECG in Extra Notes
Cardiovascular Health – 3

-- 98 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Atrial Fibrillation
Cause1 	Idiopathic.
Heart: hypertension, ischaemia, valve disease and other cardiac conditions.
Metabolic: hyperthyroid or diabetes.
Acute changes: Infection or electrolyte imbalance.
Respiratory: PE or lung cancer.
Drug/food: alcohol, cafeine, salbutamol or thyroxine.
Correct any underlying cause then manage the heart rate or rhythm.
Symptoms 	Asymptomatic, SOB, palpitations, syncope, dizziness, chest pain, stroke, TIA.
Complications 	Stroke, TIA, heart failure, cardiomyopathy or ischaemia.
Investigations2 	ECG, if an irregular pulse is detected,2 to make the diagnosis and for possible signs of old
ischaemia.
If paroxysmal AF (PAF) is suspected and an ECG has not captured AF:
• 	24-hour ambulatory ECG monitor if asymptomatic or episodes <24 hours apart.2
Ambulatory ECG monitor, event recorder or other ECG technology if episodes >24 hours apart.2
Check FBC, TSH and electrolytes for reversible causes.
U&E and LFT are needed for the bleeding risk assessment and medication choice.
CXR if a lung cause suspected.
24-hour tape if daily palpitations or event recorder if infrequent palpitations.
Echocardiogram If concern of underlying structural disease (murmur) or functional heart disease – which infu-
ences medication.3
AF can be managed in primary care but see reasons for referral in Extra Notes*
Rate control2 	Beta-blocker (bisoprolol) if not contraindicated.
Do not prescribe amiodarone for long-term rate control or sotalol in primary care.
OR 	Rate-limiting calcium-channel blocker (diltiazem) if not contraindicated.
If still not efective may add digoxin to either of above.
OR 	Digoxin monotherapy for non-paroxysmal AF if they are sedentary or other medications
rejected due to comorbidities or preference.
If still poor rate control and symptomatic consider combination therapy with any two of
following: a beta-blocker, diltiazem, digoxin.
See Extra Notes at the end of this chapter for CHA2DS2-VASc and ORBIT bleeding risk
score, DOACs and reasons to refer to cardiology.
➠ 84
Cardiovascular Health – 3

-- 99 of 575 --

➠ 85
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Richard Turner 	57 years 	M
PMH 	No medical history
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	BP 162/102 at a check with the nurse
Investigations 	Average ambulatory BP reading 151/96
Household 	Gillian Turner 	56 years 	F

-- 100 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Hypertension
Open ☐ 	What led you to have this tested? Do you know your readings?
ICE ☐ 	When you saw the 151/96 fgure what went through your mind? Is this a worry for you?
What did you think I was going to say?
History ☐ 	Do you have any medical conditions?
Risk ☐ 	Has a family member had a heart problem, high BP or a stroke?
Sense ☐ 	So this has come out of the blue? How do you feel about being told your BP is raised?
Flags ☐ 	When talking about BP, I usually check you haven’t sufered with any headaches?
Or any chest or calf pains? Does your heart ever feel like it is beating too fast?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned your wife was helping you test it and she wanted you to have a check; what
does she think? Why do you think she is worried?
SummarICE ☐ 	So to summarise, you’ve been very well and therefore you were surprised when your BP
was high. You were hoping that I’d say we’ll keep an eye on it but your wife wants you to
take tablets, especially with her father’s experience. Is that right?
Empathy ☐ 	I can see you take this seriously and your wife is concerned as her father had high BP.
Impression ☐ 	Your diagnosis is Stage 2 hypertension, which is the medical word for high BP. It is Stage 2
because the top number is >150 and the bottom >95.
Experience ☐ 	What do you understand about why we treat high BP?
Explanation ☐ High BP can increase your risk of a stroke, angina or a heart attack, which is why it is
important to control it. It can also harm your kidneys and eyes. Stage 2 hypertension is not
dangerous; however, it does suggest that we should be treating the BP with tablets as well
as lifestyle advice.
Recommend ☐ Whether to start treatment is your decision. My recommendation would be to start a tablet
called amlodipine 5 mg each morning. Tis helps to relax the blood vessels to decrease the
pressure. Like any tablet there may be side efects, such as the possibility of ankle swelling,
tummy upset or headaches, in which case we could consider a diferent tablet. How do
you feel about taking the tablet? I also suggest you see your optician and inform them that
you are now receiving BP medication. Rarely, eyesight can be afected. However, if they
see small changes from the efects of BP this is useful for us all to be aware of so do let me
know if this is the case please.
Empower ☐ 	Tings you can do to help include exercising more, reducing alcohol and restricting salt
in your diet. A 6 g reduction in salt each day reduces your BP number by 10.1 Do you feel
these suggestions will be possible?
Future ☐ 	Tinking ahead, we need to do some routine tests with the nurse to check your general
health including an ECG, which is a heart tracing, a urine test and blood tests including
cholesterol and to check your kidneys. Is this okay?
Specifcs ☐ 	So to summarise, you will start a morning tablet, make an appointment with the nurse for a
heart tracing, blood test and urine test, then see me in 1 month. Please also see an optician.
If you’re having a problem with the tablet or have any concerns, please let me know.
➠ 86
Cardiovascular Health – 4

-- 101 of 575 --

➠ 87	
Patient’s Story 	Hypertension
Doctor’s notes. Richard Turner, 57 years. PMH: none. Medications: none.
Last consultation: BP 162/102 right arm and 160/102 lef arm (practice nurse). Average
ambulatory BP reading 151/96.
How to act 	Interested in your health.
PC 	‘I’ve telephoned to fnd out what I need to do about my blood pressure.’
History 	You feel well. No PMH or FH.
You were at a friend’s house for dinner and they had purchased a BP machine, so you
checked yours.
‘My wife wanted me to go to the nurse to check it again.’
Te nurse found that your BP was raised and gave you a machine to check it at home.
You discussed the average BP, 151/96, with the nurse and have been told to phone the doctor.
Social 	Very healthy. You enjoy squash and consider yourself to be a healthy eater.
You drink very little alcohol and have never smoked.
You work as a gardener so are active during the day.
You enjoy your work, and do not fnd it stressful.
You have a good relationship with your wife.
ICE 	You thought 151/96 was high but thought you’d be told to keep an eye on it. You are worried
the doctor will want to start a tablet. You are not keen as this will make you feel old, but it
won’t otherwise impact on your life.
You thought you had no CV risk factors, so you were quite shocked.
You understand that it was your father-in-law’s BP that led to his stroke.
You are happy to take the tablet, once its importance has been explained.
You are also interested in other ways to decrease your BP.
Do not tell the doctor your wife is worried unless the doctor asks.
You have mentioned your wife twice already. It is your wife who is worried.
Her father was always talking about his BP before his stroke.
She would like you to take tablets.
Cardiovascular Health – 4

-- 102 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Hypertension
Refer to full NICE Guideline NG136. Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management. August 2019.
Investigations2 	Bloods: Lipids (for QRISK) and HbA1c (comorbidity), U&E, eGFR (baseline for Rx),
FBC (anaemia) and TFT (cause).3 ECG (ventricular hypertrophy, arrhythmia),
ACR (microalbuminuria/CKD) and fundi (retinopathy).
Diagnosis2 	Check BP in both arms, if diference >15 mmHg persists use the arm with ↑readings.
Ambulatory monitoring (best): 2 measurements/hour during waking hours.
Home BP monitoring twice/day (2 readings 1 minute apart) for 4–7 days.
Discard 1st day’s reading and average remaining.
Stage 1 HTN 	Clinic BP ≥140/90 and home BP ≥135/85. Treat if* (see below).
Stage 2 HTN 	Clinic BP ≥160/100 and home BP ≥150/95. Start treatment.
Stage 3/severe HTN 	Clinic SBP ≥180 or DBP ≥110. Treat immediately.
Accelerated HTN 	Papilloedema or retinal haemorrhage. Admission.
Suspected phaeochromocytoma. Admission.
Aims of clinic 	BP:
<140/90 if <80 years or <150/90 if >80 years with treated HTN.2
<140/80 if type 2 DM or <135/85 if type 1 DM.4,5
<130/80 if DM and either CKD or retinopathy or cerebrovascular disease.4,6
Treating hypertension2 (Check you have stopped the OCP!)
A = ACE inhibitor. B = β-blocker. C = calcium-channel blocker. D = thiazide-like
diuretic
If <55 years start with ACEI. If required A + C + D.
If >55 years or people of Black ethnicity and of African/Caribbean descent start with CCB.
If required C + A + D.
NB Always check adherence before adding new drug.
* Adult <80 years with persistent stage 1 hypertension AND ≥1 of:
target organ damage
established cardiovascular disease
renal disease
estimated 10-year risk CVD ≥10%
Use clinical judgement if frailty or multimorbidity.2
Secondary causes
of HTN 	Primary hyperaldosteronism, phaeochromocytoma, CKD and sleep apnoea.
Ask about UTIs as a child. Investigations: urinary normetadrenalines, USS kidneys +
referral to exclude fbromuscular dysplasia of the renal artery.
See Extra Notes at the end of this chapter for white coat hypertension and resistant hypertension.
➠ 88
Cardiovascular Health – 4

-- 103 of 575 --

➠ 89
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Hibiki Hayashi 	75 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Medications 	Ramipril 5 mg
Bendrofumethiazide 2.5 mg
Allergies 	NKDA
Consultations
Investigations 	Last BP 132/78 (1 month ago)
Household 	No household members registered

-- 104 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Angina
Open ☐ 	Tell me about this pain, perhaps from when it frst began.
History ☐ 	How frequently does it happen? Have you noticed anything that brings it on? What takes it away?
Do you have any other symptoms with the pain?
Flags ☐ 	Have you had a pain that has lasted more than 10 minutes? Do you have pain when you are
sitting or lying down? Is this pain becoming more frequent?
Impact ☐ 	Has it stopped you from doing anything?
ICE ☐ 	When you have had this pain, what has gone through your mind? What do you think is causing
the pain? What did you think I might say we should do about this pain?
Risk ☐ 	Apart from HTN, do you have any other medical problems? Has anyone in your family had
heart problems or a stroke? Do you smoke? Do you get any pain in the lower legs when you are
walking?
Sense ☐ 	You seem very quiet…are you very worried?
Curious ☐ 	I’m sorry to hear you lost Maho and Hisae. Tat must have been devastating. You sound very
low just now. Sometimes when people feel so low, they don’t want to be alive. Do you feel like
this? Have you had thoughts about ending your life?
SummarICE ☐ 	So you have also been feeling lonely and, since Maho died, you have had chest pains which you
thought may be a heart attack. You thought I might say you need an operation, but you don’t
want this. Is that right?
O/E ☐ 	May I have a listen to your heart, feel your pulse and take your BP?
Empathy ☐ 	Te past 2 years have been life changing for you.
Impression ☐ 	Mr Hayashi, I think you may be sufering with angina. It is unlikely that you have had a heart
attack. If pain goes away when you stop, this is called angina. Angina and depression are very
common together, as angina can afect a person’s daily life.
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across angina? Do you know anyone with it?
Explanation ☐ 	Angina is where the blood fow to the heart is not as good as it could be due to furring of the
vessels – a bit like clogged drains. A heart attack is diferent; this is when the pipe becomes
completely blocked.
Recommend ☐ I can make some recommendations to help your symptoms and protect your heart.
Options ☐ 	I would like to give you a spray to use once under the tongue if you have pain. It widens the vessels
to your heart. If the pain is still there afer 5 minutes, take a second spray. If you feel unwell, or
the pain is present 5 minutes later, call an ambulance. You may notice a headache and, if dizziness
occurs, sit for a few minutes. Please also use this spray before exercise. Are you happy to try it?
Please repeat back to me how and when you would use it. Are you happy to take aspirin to thin
your blood to help the blood fow through the vessels? Have you had tummy ulcers, because
aspirin can make stomach problems worse? We should also start bisoprolol, every morning, to
slow the heart and prevent pain when you are walking. If it makes you feel tired or lightheaded
let me know. May I prescribe all three medications? I would like to send you to our chest pain
clinic where you will be seen within a couple of weeks to confrm the diagnosis. Any concerns
from what I have said? I will write it all down for you as there is a lot to remember.
InCLudE ☐ 	Yes, you can drive, unless angina happens during driving, in which case stop driving until the
angina is controlled.
Empower ☐ 	You’ve mentioned getting another dog to go for walks and for company. When your angina is
under control, this would be an excellent idea to help both your mood and heart.
Future ☐ 	Have you ever wondered about stopping smoking? We can help you with this. Have a think about
whether you might be interested in talking to someone about your loss and if information on
community groups would be of interest.
Specifcs ☐ 	I will book you in for a heart tracing and blood tests to check your cholesterol and sugar, then
I’ll make you a double appointment with me next week so we can talk about your results, your
angina and have a longer talk about your mood. Is that okay?
Safety net ☐ 	If the pain becomes more frequent or occurs at a shorter distance let a GP know immediately.
If pain occurs at rest or has been present for 10 minutes, call 999.
➠ 90
Cardiovascular Health – 5

-- 105 of 575 --

➠ 91	
Patient’s Story 	Angina
Doctor’s notes Hibiki Hayashi, 70 years. PMH: hypertension.
Medications: ramipril 5 mg, bendrofumethiazide 2.5 mg. NKDA. Last BP 132/78.
How to act 	You are subdued.
PC 	‘Doctor, I keep getting these chest pains.’
History 	It started 3 months ago when you were walking to get the paper.
Since then, it has happened a few times a week, usually afer about 500 metres, particularly
if you are in a hurry.
Te pain makes you stop. Te pain is then gone afer about 2 minutes.
You have not had pain before this distance and no rest pain.
Te pain is in the centre of your chest and feels very heavy.
Tere is no radiation. Tere are no associated cardiac symptoms.
You have not felt the pain afer eating, only when walking.
No claudication pain.
You take two tablets for BP. You have no FH.
Social 	You live in a bungalow. You have not had pain when at home.
You lost your wife, Hisae, 2 years ago. Since then, your dog, Maho, kept you going.
You used to walk Maho 2 miles a day but she died 4 months ago.
You feel very lonely and low and have stopped going to get the paper.
You don’t go out any more and don’t see anybody. Your son lives 2 hours away.
You think about getting another dog. You smoke 20/day. You do not drink alcohol.
You moved from Japan to the UK 40 years ago.
ICE 	You are not worried. You think you have probably had a heart attack.
You don’t want to die and have had no thoughts about ending your life, but you do some-
times think it would be nice to be with Hisae and Maho.
You expect the doctor will tell you that you need an operation. You don’t want this.
You believe angina is a small heart attack.
Ask the doctor ‘Am I allowed to drive?’
Examination 	HR 66 bpm regular. BP 130/70. HS normal.
Cardiovascular Health – 5

-- 106 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Angina
Refer to full NICE Guideline CG126. Stable angina: management. August 2016.
Investigations 	ECG.
Consider CXR if lung cancer/infection possible.
FBC for anaemia.
Referral 	To confrm diagnosis – rapid-access chest pain clinic.
Re-refer if symptomatic despite medical therapy.
Classifcation
Stable angina 	May be typical (3/3) or atypical (2/3) of:
• 	Constricting pain
• 	Precipitated by exertion
• 	Relieved by rest.1,2
Unstable angina 	Deterioration or angina at rest. Requires immediate admission.3
Medications in angina 	GTN before exercise and during angina (unless taken Viagra).
β-blocker or CCB.
CCB 	Diltiazem is rate limiting.
However, if HF or needing to combine a CCB with either a β-blocker
or ivabradine, CCB should be amlodipine, nifedipine or felodipine.
Others: 	Nitrate (ISMN), nicorandil.
Ivabradine, ranolazine – specialist only prescribed.
Secondary prevention drugs Aspirin 75 mg OD. Continue clopidogrel if on this for another reason.
Statin.
ACEI if DM or other conditions, in line with NICE.4
Cardiac syndrome X 	Consider in ongoing symptoms and normal angiography. Continue antiangi-
nal if efective. No evidence of beneft with secondary prevention treatment.
It is possible to have a complex case in a simulated surgery, as well as in real life, when you may need to
manage multiple problems. In this example we suggest completing a risk assessment for depression, then
focusing on the chest pain and fnally signposting the need to manage the depression at a later date.
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk or a helpful guide to DVLA guidance for medical
conditions
➠ 92
Cardiovascular Health – 5

-- 107 of 575 --

➠ 93	
Extra Notes 	Managing the Stroke Risk in Atrial Fibrillation
Discuss the risks and benefts of anticoagulation with patients with AF to facilitate informed decision-
making. For most people, the benefts outweigh the risks of bleeding but, for those with an increased risk
of bleeding, careful monitoring is needed and the benefts may not always outweigh the risks.1
Remember to consider modifable risk factors for bleeding including:1
• 	Uncontrolled hypertension.
• 	Poor control of INR in patients already taking vitamin K antagonists (such as warfarin).
• 	Concurrent medication, e.g. antiplatelets, SSRIs and NSAIDs.
• 	Harmful alcohol use.
• 	Reversible causes of anaemia.
CHA2DS2VASc score1
Consider anticoagulation for ♂ with a score of ≥1 or ♀ with a score of ≥2, afer taking into account the risk
of bleeding using the ORBIT toolkit.
In people aged <65 with AF and very low risk of stroke, i.e. no risk factors apart from their sex (♂ with a
score of 0, or ♀ with a score of 1) – do not ofer anticoagulation for stroke prevention.
‘Do not withhold anticoagulation solely because of a person’s age or their risk of falls.’1
ORBIT-AF2
NICE recommends using the ORBIT-AF tool to assess the risk of bleeding when considering starting anti-
coagulation or when reviewing people already taking anticoagulants, as evidence shows that it has a higher
accuracy than other tools when predicting absolute bleeding risk.1
Te ORBIT-AF score takes account of fve diferent criteria, maximum score 7:
Criterion 	Score
Older age ≥ 75 	1
Reduced Hb 
2
2
1
1
Score 0-2 	Low bleed risk
Score 3 	Medium bleed risk
Score 4-7 	High bleed risk
DOACs1
Ofer treatment with a DOAC to patients with AF and a CHA2DS2VASc ≥2.
Consider treatment with a DOAC for patients with AF and a CHA2DS2VASc of 1.
Cardiovascular Health
♂Hb < 130 g/dL
♀Hb < 120 g/dL 	
Or Hct 	
♂<40% ♀<30%
Or history of anaemia 	
Bleeding history
Insufficient renal function
(eGFR	(eGFR <60	<60 m	mg/dL)	g/dL)
TTrreeaattm	men	ent w	t wiitth a	h annttiippllaatteelets	lets

-- 108 of 575 --

Choice of DOAC: NICE recommends apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban and rivaroxaban ‘when used in line
with the criteria specifed in the relevant NICE technology appraisal guidance’.1
If DOAC is contraindicated, not tolerated or not suitable, ofer a vitamin K antagonist, e.g. warfarin.
If already taking a vitamin K antagonist and stable, consider continuing with this and reviewing at the next
routine appointment.
*Consider referral to cardiology:1
‘Refer people promptly at any stage if treatment fails to control the symptoms of atrial fbrillation
and more specialised management is needed. Tis should be within 4 weeks afer the failed
treatment or afer recurrence of atrial fbrillation afer cardioversion.’
New onset AF with heart failure or secondary to reversible causes.
For possible amiodarone or catheter ablation if heart failure present.
For cardioversion following 3 weeks’ anticoagulation unless there is good evidence to suggest
this is a new AF within <48 hours.
Amiodarone may be prescribed (by specialist) prior to DC cardioversion.
Lone AF and in the young.
Lef atrial appendage occlusion may be considered by specialists if anticoagulation is CI or not
tolerated or there is a high bleed risk.
Acute admission to the medics3
Unwell/unstable e.g. tachycardic, hypotensive, LOC, chest pain, increasing SOB, dizziness.
Use clinical judgement.
In all cases discuss the following stroke and bleeding risk assessments with the patient: CHA2DS2-VASc
stroke risk score for AF, PAF, atrial futter or if risk of recurrence following cardioversion or ablation.
If possible, use the ORBIT bleeding risk score to assess bleeding risk because ‘evidence shows that it has a
higher accuracy’.1
Cardiovascular Health	
➠ 94

-- 109 of 575 --

➠ 95
Reproduced from Handbook of Cardiac Electrophysiology, Second Edition (2020), CRC Press. With thanks
to Rong Bai, Mohamed Salim, Luigi Di Biase, Robert Schweikert and Walid Saliba.
Cardiovascular Health

-- 110 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Hypertension
White coat HTN 	>20/10 mmHg between home and clinic. Monitor only home readings.
Confrm with ABPM and then treat average as per usual guidance.1
Resistant HTN 	HTN persists despite three drugs:
• 	Confrm clinic BP using ambulatory or home BP readings.
• 	Assess for postural hypertension.
• 	Discuss adherence.
4th line. If K ≤4.5 mmol/L and eGFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2 consider spironolactone. Repeat
eGFR/U&E in 1/12 and as needed thereafer.
Caution ↓eGFR = ↑ risk of hyperkalaemia.1
If K >4.5 mmol/L then consider an alpha-blocker or beta-blocker.
If oedema, HF or risk of HF, ofer thiazide diuretic.1
If diabetic, caution with B and D and consider A frst for microalbuminuria.
‘People of black African or African–Caribbean family origin, consider an ARB in prefer-
ence to an ACEI.’1
If >80 years, consider starting with D. If required D + A (HYVET study).2
We suggest U&E at baseline and 2 weeks afer initiating/increasing ACEI or ARB or
spironolactone.
Refer if BP remains uncontrolled on four agents1 or earlier if concerned.
NB: Also, be aware of sodium content in drugs (e.g. efervescent).
➠ 96
Cardiovascular Health

-- 111 of 575 --

CHAPTER 4 OVERVIEW
Dermatology
➠ 97
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Dermatology
Learning points in this chapter include:
1 	Skin Lesion 	‘Diagnose, treat and advise on common
skin conditions effciently’
‘The effect of an ageing population and
increased exposure to sun damage in an
older population’
‘Recognition of alarm or red fag
features’
Skin lesions – advice
from the Primary Care Dermatology
Society
Solar keratosis
2 	Acne 	‘Acne vulgaris, including indications and
side effects of isotretinoin’
When to refer
Treatment
3 	Melasma 	‘Hyperpigmentation’ 	When to refer
Treatment
4 	Eczema 	‘Dermatological disorders in childhood…
atopic eczema’
‘Common and important conditions –
eczema: infantile, childhood, atopic
‘Prescribe appropriately and safely’
Cause
Management
Red fags
Fingertip units
5 	Psoriasis 	‘Recognise the importance of the
psychosocial impact of skin problems’
‘Appreciate the complexity of care that is
needed with some skin problems’
‘Examination of the rest of the skin, nails,
scalp, hair and systems such as joints
when appropriate’
Triggers
Associations
Limb/trunk treatment
Scalp psoriasis treatment

-- 112 of 575 --

CHAPTER 4 REFERENCES
Skin Lesion
1. 	http://www.dermnetnz.org/lesions/lichenoid-keratosis.html. Mar 2016.
2. 	www.pcds.org.uk
3. 	http://www.pcds.org.uk/ee/images/uploads/general/skin-cancer-detection-patient-advice-07-2012.pdf
4. 	http://www.dermnetnz.org/lesions/solar-keratoses.html. Dec 2015.
Acne
1. 	https://www.pcds.org.uk/clinical-guidance/acne-vulgaris. Aug 2021.
2. 	http://www.pcds.org.uk/ee/images/uploads/general/Acne_Treatment_2015-web.pdf
Useful Resource
https://patient.info/skin-conditions/acne-leafet. Jul 2021.
Melasma
1. 	http://www.dermnetnz.org/colour/melasma.html. Oct 2020.
2. 	http://www.britishskinfoundation.org.uk/SkinInformation/AtoZofSkindisease/Melasma.aspx
3. 	Pandya A., Hynan L., Bhore R. et al. Reliability assessment and validation of the Melasma Area and Severity Index
(MASI) and a new modifed MASI scoring method. J Am Acad Dermatol 2011; 64: 78–83.
Eczema
1. http://www.pcds.org.uk/clinical-guidance/atopic-eczema. Aug 2021.
Psoriasis
1. 	http://www.pcds.org.uk/clinical-guidance/psoriasis-an-overview. Jul 2021.
2. 	NICE Guideline CG153. Psoriasis: assessment and management. Sep 2017.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 98
Dermatology

-- 113 of 575 --

➠ 99
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Paul Robson 	65 years 	M
PMH 	No medical history known
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 114 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Skin Lesion
Open ☐ 	Tell me about the skin changes from the beginning please. Anything else that you noticed?
ICE ☐ 	What has worried you about this? What do you think it is? An SCC – tell me what you
understand by this. You mentioned your daughter. What does she think? Is there anything
else you hoped we would discuss today?
Sense ☐ 	Tank you for sending a photograph – that is very helpful. I can hear you are worried about
this.
Curious ☐ 	Is your daughter medical? Did you have any other ideas between you?
History ☐ 	Tell me about you. Your general health? Any other problems to report whilst we have the
opportunity today? Do you work? Have you ever smoked? How much alcohol do you drink?
Is anyone else at home? Tell me about your lifestyle or hobbies.
Risk ☐ 	Have you had much sun exposure? Sunburn?
Flags ☐ 	Has the lesion changed? Over what time period? Have you noticed changes in size, colour?
shape, thickness? Has it bled?
O/E ☐ 	Let me have a good look at the photograph. Tank you.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have noticed for a few years that the skin on parts of your scalp and face
is discoloured but then, over the past month, the patch on your right temple became darker
and thicker. Ten your daughter, who is a GP, believes it changed again over a week and
she thinks it may be an SCC because it has changed quickly. You would like to be referred
promptly for a biopsy and hope that I can give you my opinion as well as explain what is
likely to happen at the hospital appointment. Is that correct?
Impression ☐ 	I agree there is sun damage to the face and scalp, which we call solar keratosis. We try to
keep this under control with creams…
InCludE ☐ 	….as it has the potential to become cancerous and change to the SCC which your daughter
talked about. But I agree it is not typical, because of the pigment. Terefore, we also need
to rule out a melanoma.
Explanation ☐ Sometimes we can only be sure what we are dealing with by taking a biopsy of the skin and
looking at it under a microscope.
Recommend ☐ Tis is certainly necessary if a lesion changes quickly. How do you feel about that?
Options ☐ 	At the hospital, it is likely that they will frst have a look at your skin and may or may not
do a biopsy on the same day. Tey may also talk to you about creams for the sun-damaged
skin. Tey will write to me with their fndings and advice if any treatment is required.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate it is a worry when anyone points out something which is potentially a cancer.
You said you were on holiday at the time – I hope you still managed to have a good time!
Empower ☐ 	You have come promptly – well done – and I hope this can be dealt with quickly. Do wear
a hat and factor 50 sun cream when outside. Now you’re someone we don’t see very ofen,
so I was wondering if we could arrange some general health checks?
Specifcs ☐ 	I would like to refer you on the suspected cancer pathway, which means you should be seen
within 2 weeks. If this doesn’t happen, I need to know straight away please. Can you also
make a follow-up appointment with me 2 weeks afer your clinic appointment unless the
specialists at the hospital advise this is not necessary? If I receive a letter meanwhile, and
action is required, I will call you.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever notice any other skin changes or you are not sure, see your GP straight away.
➠ 100
Dermatology – 1

-- 115 of 575 --

➠ 101	
Patient’s Story 	Skin Lesion
Doctor’s notes Paul Robson, 65 years. No medical history or medications.
How to act 	Pleasant. You have written down what you need and hope to be an efcient patient. You
show the doctor the photograph or examination description with your opening statement.
PC 	‘I am concerned about the sun damage on my face.’
History 	You have had this skin damage on your right temple for about 3 years and there are other
parts of the head which look similar but are not as dark and not as noticeable.
If asked about a change, over the past month it has become darker and possibly thicker. It
has not changed in size.
You have no other medical problems. You are very well in yourself.
Social 	You are a retired physics lecturer. You have never smoked.
You drink a glass of wine most nights.
You live with your wife and keep very active playing golf.
You have had lots of sun exposure and have been burnt several times. You enjoy spending
time outside both in the garden and playing golf and try to go on a couple of sunny holidays
a year. You don’t always wear sun cream in the UK.
ICE 	You think it is fne. You are not worried and wish to be pragmatic.
‘Well, my daughter noticed it whilst we were on a family holiday.’
If asked, your daughter is a GP.
If asked what she thinks, explain: ‘My daughter thinks it may be the beginning of an SCC
because it’s scaly and she thinks it has changed from the week before, but she says she isn’t
sure because it is pigmented.’
If asked what your daughter thinks about management: ‘She said I should have a biopsy.’
You hope the GP will give you his/her opinion, refer you to a dermatologist and tell you
what is likely to happen at the hospital.
However, you are aware how busy GPs are and are satisfed with a referral.
If the GP does not refer you, follow his/her advice.
You are not interested in a general health check at the moment. You will, however, talk to
your daughter about it.
Examination 	Description of the lesion for the doctor: on the patient’s right temple there is a 1 cm
pigmented lesion with a scale and irregular outline. Te base is thickened. Tere is no
ulceration or induration. Central hyperpigmentation which is raised and surrounded by
fat irregular slightly pigmented areas. Tere is no rolled edge or central telangiectasia.
Pigmented areas over the scalp. Tere are no other lesions of concern on the body.
Reproduced from An Atlas of Dermoscopy
(2013), CRC Press. With thanks to Steven
Q. Wang, Harold S. Rabinovitz, Margaret C.
Oliviero and Ashfaq A. Marghoob.
Dermatology – 1

-- 116 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Skin Lesion
Te biopsy returned as a lichenoid keratosis. DermNet NZ provides an excellent educational resource1
including pictures and descriptions of common and not so common lesions.
Skin Lesions –Advice from the Primary Care Dermatology Society
Primary Care Dermatology Society (PCDS) website is recommended reading.
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for a useful patient advice leafet for skin
lesions and useful diagnostic tables from PCDS.2
PCDS encourages looking at the body (not the individual lesion alone) for ‘pattern comparison’ and spot
‘the ugly duckling’.2
A change in a lesion or the following features (A–G) should raise concern.3
Asymmetry 	In shape or colour
Border 	Uneven, notched or irregular
Colour 	Either several colours within one lesion, or a diferent colour to other moles.
Dimensions 	Change and size
Elevated
Firm
Growth
Solar (actinic) keratosis
Features 	Sun-exposed sites.
May be fat or thickened, with scale or a wart/horn surface, tender or asymptomatic and
the colour can vary from skin coloured, red or pigmented.4
At risk of 	Developing into a cancer (e.g. SCC and BCC) or cutaneous horn or actinic cheilitis.4
Treatment 	Aimed at removing the afected cells so the epidermis can regenerate.4
Minor surgery 	Options include cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen; shave, curettage and electrocautery of
hypertrophic tissue or horns, or excision.4
Field Rx’s 	‘Creams are used to treat areas of sun damage and fat actinic keratosis.’4
‘Pre-treatment with keratolytics (such as urea cream, salicylic acid ointment or topical
retinoid), and thorough skin cleansing improves response rates.’4
E.g. diclofenac gel, 5-fuorouracil, imiquimod, photodynamic therapy and ingenol mebutate
gel4 – see DermNet NZ for further advice.
‘Tender, thickened, ulcerated or enlarging actinic keratoses should be treated aggressively.
Asymptomatic fat keratoses may not require active treatment but should be kept under
observation.’
➠ 102
Dermatology – 1

-- 117 of 575 --

➠ 103
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Adelaide Bukoski 	28 years 	F
PMH 	No medical history known
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No investigations
Household 	No household members registered
Reproduced from Acne and Its Terapy (2007),
CRC Press. With thanks to Guy F. Webster and
Anthony V. Rawlings.

-- 118 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Acne
Open ☐ 	Please tell me about your skin. Anything else you’ve noticed? Please tell me why a referral to an
endocrinologist is important to you? Why specifcally an endocrinologist? Tank you.
History ☐ 	Tell me about any other medical problems you have had. And in the family? What have you tried
for your skin? Do you take any medicines? Do you smoke? What is your facial washing regime?
ICE ☐ 	What do you believe is causing the spots? What do you hope an endocrinologist will do? Is there
another reason why you think there is a problem with your hormones? What concerns you most
about your skin? Were you hoping I would start treatment today?
Risk ☐ 	Do you use hormonal contraception like the pill? Do you know your current weight?
Flags ☐ 	Have you noticed any hair on your face? Is your weight stable? Are your periods regular? Have
you noticed that the spots increase around your period?
Impact ☐ 	How does your skin afect you and your self-esteem?
O/E ☐ 	Tank you for sending a photograph, let me have a good look at it. I can see that there are a few
black and white heads on the face and back and some papules. Tankfully there is no scarring,
pustules, nodules or cysts. Tere is no evidence of excess facial hair.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you believe that your spots are being caused by a hormonal problem and would
like a referral to a skin specialist and blood tests to check your hormone levels.
Impression ☐ 	I believe you have acne, which afects 12% of women over 25.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about acne? Do you know why it happens?
Explanation ☐ 	Pores, tiny holes in the skin, become blocked due to the skin thickening at the surface or dead
skin pores can become blocked and oil can collect in the pores. Bacteria get into the oil and
cause painful red spots.
InCLudE ☐ 	Sometimes hormonal imbalances can cause excess oils, e.g. PCOS or excess male hormones.
Every woman has male hormones, but some women have more. You have no other symptoms
of these hormone problems but we can do blood tests to check the hormones on your list. LH,
FSH and testosterone levels will help us rule out a hormonal cause for your acne. What are your
thoughts?
Options ☐ 	As cream alone hasn’t worked, we could try a combination of a cream called Epiduo with an anti-
biotic tablet, called lymecycline, taken every day. Te Epiduo contains two treatments which kill
the germs, unblock the pores and reduce the infammation. Lymecycline is an antibiotic which
kills the skin bacteria and will help treat the pustules. Like all tablets, side efects are possible; the
cream can irritate the skin and the tablets can cause nausea or headaches, but usually people feel
fne. Even if you did have PCOS or a raised male hormone level, treatment options are similar,
including a hormone pill used for acne. Tere is another treatment, called isotretinoin, which
is only prescribed by skin specialists because it has risks, e.g. to the liver. We could refer you to
the skin specialists should your skin not improve with the treatment I have suggested. I can give
you information on all these treatments to read.
Sense ☐ 	Is your priority fnding out if there is a hormone problem? I can see you are unhappy.
Curious ☐ 	What would your GP in Poland do? What do you believe the GPs role is for you?
Empathy ☐ 	I can imagine it is frustrating that my suggestions are diferent from your other doctor. I hear
how important this is for you. Changes in your skin can afect how you feel and your confdence,
especially in a new relationship.
Options ☐ 	Because acne is so common, GPs know a lot about it and we don’t need to refer everyone to a
skin specialist. We could start treatment today. Would you like me to prescribe you something
appropriate?
Empower ☐ 	At frst, try the cream every other day to reduce any irritation. Wear clothes like cotton, which can
breathe, to avoid your back from getting sweaty. Clean your face and back twice a day. Cleaning
too much may cause excess oil to be produced.
Specifcs ☐ 	Shall we meet again in 3 months? Te treatment prevents new spots forming so it may be 8 weeks
before you notice a big improvement.
Safety net ☐ 	If you notice scarring or increased infammation, please return earlier. You must stop this treat-
ment before falling pregnant.
➠ 104
Dermatology – 2

-- 119 of 575 --

➠ 105	
Patient’s Story 	Acne
Doctor’s notes Adelaide Bukoski, 28 years. New patient.
How to act 	Demanding.
PC 	‘I would like to see an endocrinologist for my spots.’
History 	You moved to the UK from Poland 6 months ago.
In Poland you were given a cream for your spots, but this was not efective.
You do not know what the cream was called.
You are otherwise well. You have never taken any regular medication.
You had a copper coil inserted 2 weeks ago.
You have regular periods and no symptoms of PCOS.
Te acne is on your face and back. You have tried eating a healthy diet.
You wash your face four times a day and have spent lots of money on cleansing products.
Social 	You work in a cafe. You drink minimal alcohol and have never smoked. You have a new
partner.
ICE 	You believe there is a problem with your hormones.
You would like to see a specialist as you want to know why you have spots at your age.
You presume the GP is not able to solve the problem and demand to see an expert.
Before you lef, your GP in Poland wrote down a list of blood tests which you could have.
‘LH, FSH, oestrogen, progesterone, testosterone.’ You would like these checking.
If the doctor does not refer, you become angry as you want to fnd the cause.
You have just started a new relationship. Te spots on your back are especially bad and you
feel embarrassed and self-conscious about this.
Examination 	A few open and closed comedones on the face and back and some papules. No scarring,
pustules, nodules or cysts. No hirsutism.
Height 162 cm. Weight 58 kg. BMI 22.
You leave dissatisfed unless you are referred to an endocrinologist. You accept the suggested
treatment but walk out looking unhappy with the doctor.
Dermatology – 2

-- 120 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Acne
Tis was a challenging case with an unhappy and demanding patient, with high expectations. You may have
a patient in your surgery, or in a consultation skills simulated exam, who looks disgruntled when you explain
why their request is not appropriate, no matter how hard you try to provide suitable alternative suggestions. If
this is the case, question what you may be missing – ICE, impact, experience – and be curious. Verbalise that
you have sensed their dissatisfaction, and fully empathise (including repeating the impact of the problem
in the context of their life) before you fully explain why you feel their request is inappropriate. Negotiate
and take time to educate the patient, which may also demonstrate that you do know what you are talking
about! If, at the end of the consultation, the patient remains unhappy, you may still have done everything
appropriately. In an exam, it may be that the nub of the case is to see how you manage the challenging con-
sultation. So, don’t dwell on it! It is difcult to justify using NHS resources inappropriately simply because
a patient has high expectations. E.g. a referral to an endocrinologist for acne without abnormal blood tests.
Some patients have persistent acne lasting up to the age of 30–40 years and sometimes beyond.1
Red fags – refer immediately if 	Severe psychological distress.
Uncontrolled acne developing scarring.
Nodulo-cystic acne (Rx can be initiated, but refer).
Diagnostic uncertainty.
Refer for oral isotretinoin, if the patient wishes, for moderate/severe or Rx resistant acne or scarring.
On examination 	Comedones, papules, pustules and nodules/cysts.
Treatment1,2
See reference2 for an excellent table advising which treatment works best for each grade of acne. E.g. BPO,
topical antibiotics, Duac, OCP or oral antibiotics.
PCDS1 advise:
Topical retinoids should be used for all grades of acne.
Do not combine a topical and oral antibiotic.1
Do not use lymecycline alone – combine with BPO or/and a topical retinoid. 1
Azelaic acid is helpful in darker skin at risk of hyperpigmentation.1
Possible regimes
• 	Azelaic acid 20% – Skinoren.
• 	Either BPO or Adapalene alone but they work well in combination (Epiduo).
• 	Topical Retinoid/Antibiotic Combination Treclin (resistance may limit duration of use).1
• 	Epiduo at night + Duac in the morning.
• 	Lymecycline + Epiduo.
• 	Combined oral contraceptives containing co-cyprindiol, e.g. Dianette and any of the above.
Avoid pregnancy 	With oral tetracyclines, topical retinoids and isotretinoin.
➠ 106
Dermatology – 2

-- 121 of 575 --

➠ 107
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Francesca Reece 	32 years 	F
PMH 	NVD 1 year ago
Migraines
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	GP consultation 1 month ago – advised sun protection for
melasma.
Investigations 	No investigations
Household 	Oliver Reece 	34 years 	M
Jennifer Reece 	13 months 	F

-- 122 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Melasma
Open ☐ 	Tell me about this problem from the beginning. What thoughts have you had about it?
Impact ☐ 	How has this afected you? Has this changed how you live, your behaviour or mood?
Curious ☐ 	I see that you saw another GP a month ago. How did that go?
History ☐ 	Before this, any problems with your skin at all? Have you any other symptoms which cause you
trouble? Are you otherwise well? Tell me more about your migraines. Any other medical con-
ditions or skin problems which run in the family? Do you take any medicines? How is Jennifer?
Do you have a partner? What does he think? How is your relationship? Have you spoken to
anyone else about this? Are you working as well as being a mum?
Risk ☐ 	Do you spend much time in the sun? Is there stress in your life? How ofen are you taking ibu-
profen for your migraines?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think has caused this? Is there anything you are worried about? What would be
most helpful to you today?
Empathy ☐ 	Tis problem is causing you to change your lifestyle and lowering your self-esteem.
Sense ☐ 	I can see how important this is to you. You look saddened by the change to your skin.
O/E ☐ 	Tank you for sending a photograph of your face. May I have a close look at this? I can see some
pale brown patches on your forehead and cheeks. Everywhere else looks fne.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, since your pregnancy you feel upset and embarrassed by the uneven pigment
on your face. You want to enjoy the outdoors with Jennifer. You feel out of shape, through not
running and, therefore your skin is having an impact on your life. You also feel embarrassed
and upset that your partner agreed with your comment. You hope a dermatologist can suggest
a treatment or a prescription today. Have I got it?
Impression ☐ 	Tis is called melasma. Unfortunately, pregnancy can sometimes cause this.
Experience ☐ 	May I explain about melasma or do you already know about it?
Explanation ☐ 	Melasma is increased pigment in the skin. Te exact cause is unknown but contributing factors
are thought to be hormones, stress and sun exposure. Tere may be a family history. Some
perfumed cosmetic products can make it worse.
InCludE ☐ 	I appreciate you hoped to be seen by a dermatologist; however, I know about treatments for this
condition and can recommend something. You were worried this would not go away: hopefully
we can improve things but it’s important to be realistic. Melasma is difcult to treat and may
persist but, gradually, treatments should help to control it. As you are otherwise well, I don’t
think blood tests will help.
Options ☐ 	I have some suggestions. Firstly, avoid all things that can make it worse. Ibuprofen can cause a
pigment reaction so stop taking this and we could discuss other treatments for migraine on the
phone next week? All hormones can make melasma worse. Most of the hormone in the Mirena
stays in your womb, but some may be in your bloodstream. You could change to a copper coil
which may not make much diference but you could consider the risks and benefts of being
hormone free. Te copper coil has no hormone but can cause heavier or longer periods and
swapping coils is another procedure. Condoms are not as reliable. Could you talk to your partner
about this? Finally, wear Factor 50 sun cream 2-hourly throughout the year when outside and
use an unperfumed cleanser, moisturiser and make-up.
Recommend ☐ Tere are lots of creams for melasma. To start with, we could try azelaic acid 15% in the morning
and adapalene at night. All creams can cause irritation, so give the skin a break for 1–2 days if
this occurs. Perhaps start by using them on alternate days for a week. Te risks of creams are that
irritation can cause infammation and make the pigmentation worse. What are your thoughts
about this? If this doesn’t help, we could try a diferent combination of creams. Tese suggestions
may start to make a gradual improvement. I do believe this is melasma, but we can do a biopsy
to check for other diagnoses if you wish? How do you feel about the suggestions?
Empower ☐ 	How could you help your ftness? Wear a cap, use sun cream and enjoy running again.
Specifcs☐ 	Can you please make an appointment to talk to me on the phone next week to discuss your
migraines, then for your skin in 3 months? If you are feeling frustrated, see me sooner but,
remember, change will take time.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever notice any new skin lesions, see a GP straight away.
➠ 108
Dermatology – 3

-- 123 of 575 --

➠ 109	
Patient’s Story 	Melasma
Doctor’s notes Francesca Reece, 32 years. PMH: NVD 1 year ago. Migraines. Medications: none. GP con-
sultation 1 month ago – advised sun protection for melasma.
How to act 	Quiet but make it clear that you would be grateful for the doctor’s help.
PC 	‘My skin around my face still looks brown.’
History 	Since your pregnancy with Jennifer you have had a discoloration around your face. You saw
another GP before you moved to the area and felt s/he did not help at all. S/he just suggested
sun cream which you used, but this did not help so you now prefer to stay indoors, which
is a shame because you would like to spend time outside with Jennifer. You have occasional
migraines; you have had a few recently so take ibuprofen several times a week for this, but
melasma is your priority today. If the doctor asks questions about your migraine, they are a
unilateral headache which takes you to bed, with no raised ICP symptoms. Tey have been
with you since your teenage years and have not changed. You have no features of depression,
but the problem does get you down. You have no other symptoms on systemic enquiry. You
have no FH of this condition.
Social 	You enjoy meeting up with your friends. You work in an ofce selling online sports equip-
ment and do not smoke or drink alcohol. Your partner once agreed when you said, ‘It
doesn’t look nice, does it?’ You know he didn’t mean to hurt your feelings but knowing he
doesn’t like the look of it has made you feel more down. You are already feeling out of shape
afer the baby and haven’t managed to lose much weight. You have a good relationship with
your partner who is supportive. He hasn’t said anything else that is negative. You have a
good group of friends, but it has not happened to them so they don’t understand.
You used to be very active and go running. You don’t want to pay for gym membership as
you will hardly have the chance to go with the baby and work.
ICE 	You are worried this will never go away.
You don’t know what the doctor may be able to do but hope you can see a dermatologist.
You believe it is your hormones as it started in pregnancy. Do you need a blood test?
You wonder if going back on the contraceptive pill might help.
You have the Mirena coil ftted and have had no complications with this.
If the doctor mentions changing the Mirena, you will consider this.
You would like, if possible, to be given a prescription to start treatment today.
Decline a biopsy if ofered – you don’t like the sound of that.
Examination 	Melasma around the forehead and lateral cheeks only.
Dermatology – 3

-- 124 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Melasma
Ask 	Family history (60% report a family history1).
Sun exposure.
Contraception.
Impact on life and self-esteem.
Medications can trigger a hyperpigmentation reaction, e.g. NSAID or minocycline.1
Blood tests 	Tyroid levels if symptomatic.
U&E if suspect Addison’s disease.
Advice 	Sun protection – hat and factor 50 sun cream, applied 2-hourly – throughout the year.1
Avoid perfumed cosmetics, deodorants or soaps.1
All hormonal contraceptives can contribute, so discuss the risk/beneft of trying non-
hormonal methods.
Te response to the advice and treatments can be slow.1
Use make-up to disguise and camoufage the pigment.
Pregnancy 	Usually melasma will start to fade a few months afer pregnancy.2
Differential
diagnosis 	Post-infammatory pigmentation1
Solar lentigines/lentigo1
Drug-induced pigmentation1
Naevus of Ota and naevus of Hori1
Addison’s disease
Severity 	Melasma Area and Severity Index (MASI).3
Refer 	For biopsy to confrm the diagnosis if uncertain.
Consider dermatology email advice.
Treatment 	‘Te most successful formulation has been a combination of hydroquinone, tretinoin and
moderate potency topical steroid.’1 Tis is available in combination as a private prescription
called Pigmanorm.
See reference1 (DermNet NZ) for the full list of treatments.
Risks of
treatment 	Irritation – see BNF for individual treatment.
Contact dermatitis, further post-infammatory hyperpigmentation.1
➠ 110
Dermatology – 3

-- 125 of 575 --

➠ 111
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Arthur Miller 	12 years 	M
PMH 	Eczema
Medications 	Eumovate
Oilatum
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No investigations
Household 	Anita Miller 	45 years 	F
Gary Miller 	49 years 	M
Sophie Miller 	8 years 	F

-- 126 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Eczema
Open ☐ 	Tank you for phoning. Arthur, how is your eczema? Mum, what are your thoughts? We can
certainly make sure Arthur has a prescription back on repeat.
ICE ☐ 	I’m just wondering if we can improve things further. What do you think, Arthur? Are you happy
with your skin? Why not? What would you like to change? What did you think we may say today?
Is there anything else you would like? Mum, what are your thoughts? Is there anything else you
thought would be helpful today?
Sense ☐ 	I can see it is very important that you never run out of creams.
Curious ☐ 	What do you use for soap, Arthur? And to wash your hair? Is your head itchy?
History ☐ 	Are you otherwise well? How ofen do you need to use the Eumovate cream, Arthur? Is that
once a day? And in between times how is the skin? Is it completely back to normal? How ofen
do you use the Oilatum? Do you like the Oilatum? Does anyone else in the family have eczema?
Are there any other conditions which run in the family? What is the worst your skin has been
like? Tell me more about that.
Risk ☐ 	Do you have any allergies? Pets? Is anything making you unhappy? At school?
Impact ☐ 	How does your skin impact on your life, Arthur? How about using your medication? How would
you feel about using the Oilatum four times a day? What would stop you?
O/E ☐ 	May I have a look at photographs of your skin now? Please show me wherever it is a problem.
Tank you. I can see that there are dry and red faky patches on the arms and behind the knees.
Tere are no signs of infection. Tis is mild–moderate eczema.
SummarICE ☐ 	Arthur, your skin is always itchy but it becomes red every 2 weeks when you need to use the
Eumovate, usually twice a day for a couple of days, then it settles down. Mum, we can make sure
that you always have cream to use when needed.
Impression ☐ 	I agree. Te eczema is slightly fared up and it is important to make sure it doesn’t get worse.
InCludE ☐ 	It sounds as if the eczema is rarely completely absent and therefore I’d like to help with that, to
prevent you needing to use the Eumovate every 2 weeks.
Experience ☐ 	Arthur, what have you been told about how to use the Oilatum cream? What about the
Eumovate? Do you know why we don’t suggest using the Eumovate every day?
Explanation ☐ 	Oilatum is a strong moisturiser. If you use this cream four times a day, it stops the dryness which
causes the itching and leads to fare-ups of the eczema. Eumovate is quite a strong steroid cream.
Te moisturiser won’t cause any harm so we can use lots of it, but the steroid creams can cause
problems; for example, the skin can get thinner and bruise or it can cause problems inside the
body such as weak bones or diabetes. You haven’t been using a large amount of steroid, so I am
not concerned that you will develop these problems. You are welcome to use the steroid when it
fares up, as you have been doing, but I would like to help you to have healthier skin that is less
itchy and not so prone to cracks and infection. How does that sound?
Options ☐ 	I’m wondering what we need to do to help you feel happy with your moisturising creams: change
the cream or make it stronger so you need to use it less? Or both? Great – let’s do that.
Recommend ☐ Another cream, Doublebase Dayleve, lasts longer. Can we try it every morning?
Empathy ☐ 	Could you tell your friends about your eczema so they know why you need the cream?
InCludE ☐ 	Okay, can we be sneaky then and wash out your current shower gel container and fll it with
Oilatum? Ten your friends won’t notice.
Empower ☐ 	Showering can wash of the morning moisturiser but using Oilatum as a soap will help. Your
current shower gel and shampoo strip away all your good work with the moisturiser.
Tere’s a better shampoo for eczema – shall we try it? If you can put another layer of moisturiser
on afer a shower where no one can see, e.g. in the toilet, then do so. Shall I give you a small tube
to keep in your bag? If you need the Eumovate, just use this once a day. Mum, what do you think?
Specifcs ☐ 	Shall we speak again in a month and see if that’s made a diference? You may fnd that you no
longer need the Eumovate. I will add the creams to your repeat prescriptions. If you also book
an appointment for your daughter, we can check how she is getting on.
Safety net ☐ 	If your skin ever looks red or oozing, see the GP as this may be a sign of infection.
➠ 112
Dermatology – 4

-- 127 of 575 --

Patient’s Story 	Eczema
➠ 113
Doctor’s notes Arthur Miller, 12 years. PMH: eczema. Medications: Eumovate and Oilatum.
How to act 	Mum 	Demanding. Intelligent.
Arthur 	Articulate.
PC 	‘We need more steroid cream for Arthur but apparently Arthur needs a medication review.’
History 	Mum 	Arthur always responds well to the Eumovate, which he’s been using for years.
Arthur was born by NVD at term and had no antenatal or postnatal problems.
He has had all his immunisations. Tere is no family history.
Arthur 	You have no other medical problems. You currently use the Oilatum cream twice
a day when the eczema is bad and you don’t use it the rest of the time. You have
to use the Eumovate every 2 weeks for a couple of days for your arms, wrists and
legs. You use it twice a day. In between times it can be itchy, even on the head,
but it doesn’t always look red. You use Lynx shower gel and Head and Shoulders
shampoo. In the past your skin has been cracked and painful and you needed
an antibiotic. You have no other medical conditions. You have a younger sister
who also has eczema and you have been using her hydrocortisone cream when
you ran out of Eumovate.
Social 	Arthur 	You play sport every day. You are happy at school. You live with your parents
and sister. You have no pets.
ICE 	Mum 	You would like a prescription for the Eumovate to be on repeat so you don’t have
to keep coming back. You will tell the doctor if there is a problem. You have no
concerns.
Arthur 	Your skin is itchy at times and this bothers you. You don’t like using the emollient
as it makes you feel sticky. You never take it to school with you and you never
apply it afer showering afer sport. You think your friends would laugh at you
putting moisturiser on but it does help. You think the cream works well
Examination 	Mild–moderate eczema on the arms and behind the knees.
Reproduced from Common Skin Diseases, 18th edition (2011), CRC Press. With thanks to the late Ronald
Marks and Richard Motley.
Dermatology – 4

-- 128 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Atopic Eczema
Ask 	Atopy.
Family history.
Impact.
Compliance and regime with emollients and use of other soaps.
Stress.
Cause 	Genetic and environmental.
Mutation in the flaggrin gene in atopic eczema causing a defect in the skin barrier layer…
‘immunological changes are probably secondary to enhanced antigen penetration through a
defcient epidermal barrier. Te relevance of this fnding is that it reinforces the importance
of the regular use of emollients to help manage eczema.’ 1
Flags 	Sign of infection.
Overuse of steroids and underuse of emollients.
Admit if painful vesicular or ulcerated lesions which may be eczema herpeticum.
Management 	1
	Moisturiser ‘15–20 minutes before applying the topical steroid’.
Take the time to fnd out why compliance may be an issue and consider how to adapt the
management plan for the individual to increase their emollient use.
‘In both children and adults, it is more efective and safer to “hit hard” using more potent
treatments for a few days than it is to use less potent treatments for longer periods of time.’ 1
Other Rx’s 	Antihistamines for itch.
Advise emollients as soap substitutes.
Scalp preparations and shampoos.
Bandages and dressings.
Antibiotics – topical or oral.
Topical immunomodulators – tacrolimus and pimecrolimus. 1
Coal tar and ichthammol.
Salicylic acid.
Potassium permanganate.
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for helpful links to patient information for
eczema
The Primary Care Dermatology Society Website is very helpful. See http://www.pcds.org.
uk/clinical-guidance/atopic-eczema for further information.
➠ 114
Dermatology – 4

-- 129 of 575 --

➠ 115
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Maureen Staples 	70 years 	F
PMH 	Psoriasis
Pre-diabetes
2 × normal vaginal deliveries
Hypertension
Medications 	Dermovate
Cetraben
Ketoconazole scalp shampoo
Amlodipine 5 mg
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	18 months ago HbA1c 44 mmol/mol. BP 130/70.
Household 	Brian Staples 	72 years 	M

-- 130 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Psoriasis
Open ☐ 	Tank you for coming in to see me. Tell me about you. Tell me about your medical history please.
Any problems at all?
Impact ☐ 	What aspect of the psoriasis troubles you the most? In what way is it a nuisance?
ICE ☐ 	Is there anything you have been worried about or would like to talk about, as we certainly have
time? Is there anything you thought or hoped we may decide today?
History ☐ 	I’d be interested to know more about your psoriasis from the beginning please. Where is it a
problem at present? How bad is it at the moment? And what treatments have you used? How
ofen do you apply the Cetraben? What do you wash with? What shampoo do you use the rest
of the time? What do you think about this cream? How ofen do you apply the Dermovate?
Does it make a diference? Every day? How many days within the month would you not apply
it? When was the last time you had more than a week’s break from it? Te scalp shampoo: does
this work? How ofen do you use this? Tell me about a time when your psoriasis was particularly
a problem. Do you have any other symptoms elsewhere in the body? Are your eyes and joints
okay? How is your general health? Do you have a family history of any medical problems?
Sense ☐ 	You seem very relaxed about your health. We do like you to see us at least once a year and more
ofen if there are any issues.
Curious ☐ 	What would you change or try to improve if you could?
O/E ☐ 	May I have a look at your skin, wherever it is a problem? May I also take your blood pressure.
Tank you. May I feel your pulse and listen to your heart? Please step onto the scales, I’d like to
check your height and weight.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you feel well but the psoriasis has always been a nuisance, rubbing on and dam-
aging clothes and, if you could improve this, it would be helpful. You like the Cetraben which
you use twice a day and also in the shower.
Impression ☐ 	Your psoriasis is moderate in severity. Your high blood pressure is currently under control. I’m
wondering how your blood sugars are now and also, because you are a post-menopausal woman,
we should have a think about your bones.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about psoriasis? Has anyone explained to you the risks of too much steroid
cream?
Explanation ☐ 	Psoriasis is caused by increased cell turnover. Te Dermovate is a very strong steroid. You can
use this daily for 8 weeks but then you should have a 4-week break as there are risks of too much
steroid being absorbed into the body. For example, it can lead to changes in your hormones, a
rise in blood pressure, diabetes and thinning of the bones.
Options ☐ 	I wonder if we can take this opportunity to look at your general health to aim for improvements
as well as changing your treatment for psoriasis.
InCludE ☐ 	I notice that last year’s blood test showed that your blood sugar was in the range of pre-diabetes.
Was this explained to you? Tat is correct.
Future ☐ 	I will also put your numbers into a calculator to determine risk of frail bones so we can discuss
this next time. How does this sound?
Empathy ☐ 	You’ve lived with a troublesome condition all your life – it must have been wearing.
Recommend ☐ I recommend that you continue the Cetraben at least four times daily and please now stop the
steroid cream for at least 4 weeks and use a cream instead, which contains vitamin D, for the
next 4 weeks. It is called Dovonex and you put it on twice a day. How do you feel about this? For
the scalp I would suggest trying Cocois ointment at night and wash it of in the morning with
Capasal shampoo.
Future ☐ 	If these don’t work, we could try coal tar for the body and a steroid mousse for the scalp.
Specifcs ☐ 	It would be helpful if in 1 month you could please arrange a blood test, followed by an appoint-
ment with myself at least 2 days later to discuss the results and response to your treatment. I will
be telling the nurse what we are testing for: blood cholesterol, kidney function and sugar. If we
are not winning, we can ask the dermatologist to see you – you may be suitable for UV treatment.
What are your thoughts about this?
Safety net ☐ 	If ever the skin looks red and is weeping, it may be an infection, so see a doctor.
➠ 116
Dermatology – 5

-- 131 of 575 --

➠ 117	
Patient’s Story 	Psoriasis
Doctor’s notes Maureen Staples, 70 years.
PMH: psoriasis, pre-diabetes, 2 × NVD and hypertension.
Medications: Dermovate, Cetraben, ketoconazole shampoo and amlodipine.
Investigations: 18 months ago. HbA1c 44 mmol/mol. BP 130/70.
How to act 	Polite and playing down symptoms.
PC 	‘I have come for my annual review please.’
History 	You do not like to bother the doctor.
Te pharmacist told you that you are due for your medication review.
Te psoriasis has been present all your life. You do not think about the impact it has on
your life as you are used to it. But it does bother you: ‘It is a nuisance.’ By this you mean it
itches, rubs against clothes and the dry skin ruins your clothes.
You use the Dermovate most days so you are unsure if it makes a diference. Your last steroid
break was 4 months ago. You apply this to your elbows and knees.
You like the Cetraben and use this in the shower and morning and night.
Your head irritates you the most. It is itchy. You use the shampoo twice a week and OTC
antidandruf shampoo the rest of the week.
You have taken your blood pressure in the waiting room: it is 120/60.
No family history.
Social 	You have not worked since you were married. Your husband is well.
You are a proud grandmother of seven grandchildren.
You enjoy a whisky with your husband every night. You have never smoked.
ICE 	Your psoriasis has been with you ever since you can remember. You remember the doctor
saying last year that pre-diabetes means nearly diabetes. Since then, you cut out sugar and-
swim most days. You were very interested in the psoriasis in your 20s and read all about
it – but you have forgotten most of it now. You have no concerns. You expect the doctor will
just give you the same creams. You are interested in any suggestions the doctor has.
Examination 	Te psoriasis plaques are moderate in severity. Tere is psoriasis on the scalp. HS normal.
HR 70 bpm regular. BMI 20. BP 120/60.
Dermatology – 5

-- 132 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Psoriasis in Adults
Te 2020 RCGP curriculum reminds us about ‘Associated morbidity; physical such as cardiovascular disease
and psychological such as depression.’
Ask/triggers 	Trauma, infection, pregnancy, sunlight, drugs, stress, alcohol, smoking and HIV.1
Associations 	Autoimmune conditions.
Psoriatic arthropathy ‘In 30%... early intervention can reduce joint damage.’1
Cardiovascular disease.
Venous thromboembolism.
Depression.
Examine 	Joints and nails, BP, BMI.
Investigate 	CVD: BP, lipids and HbA1c.
NICE suggest 	Explain the risks of steroid Rx. Stop steroids when the skin is nearly clear. Prescribe a
maximum of 8 weeks of topical potent or very potent steroids, followed by a 4-week break.
Encourage emollients. Ofer referral with second and third line treatments if required.2
For limb/trunk psoriasis:2
1st – 4 weeks of a potent steroid a.m. and vitamin D/or analogue (e.g. Dovonex) p.m.
2nd – Continue the steroid for a maximum of 8 weeks.
3rd – Continue vitamin D (or analogue) twice daily until 8–12 weeks.
4th – Either a potent corticosteroid BD for 4 weeks or coal tar (e.g. Exorex) BD or
combined steroid/vitamin D (Dovobet or Enstilar foam) daily for 4 weeks.
Very potent corticosteroids only if:
‘In specialist settings under careful supervision when other topical treatment strategies
have failed for a maximum period of 4 weeks.’2
‘Do not use very potent corticosteroids in children and young people.’2
Scalp psoriasis
NICE suggests:2
• 	1st – Commencing with a potent corticosteroid daily for up to 4 weeks.
• 	2nd at 4 weeks – Change preparation or add ointments to remove scale. Apply before the steroid.
• 	3rd at 8 weeks – Combined calcipotriol + steroid or if mild/don’t tolerate, a vitamin D product alone.
• 	4th at 16 weeks – A very potent steroid for 2 weeks or coal tar or seek advice.
If mild – an example regime as advised by a dermatologist
Start with 	Ointment at night and wash of with a shampoo in the morning.
Ointment: Sebco™ scalp ointment (coal tar, salicylic acid, sulphur) or Cocois.
Shampoo: Capasal shampoo (coal tar 1%, coconut oil 1%, salicylic acid 0.5%), T gel or
Polytar.
No improvement Above plus steroid and vitamin D preparation.
Steroid: betamethasone valerate (Bettamousse) 0.1% (potent).
Vitamin D: calcipotriol scalp solution.
When improved Stop the Sebco and continue shampoo and the Bettamousse.
When controlled Stop the steroid (Bettamousse) and continue antipsoriasis shampoo PRN.
➠ 118
Dermatology – 5

-- 133 of 575 --

CHAPTER 5 OVERVIEW
ENT, Speech and Hearing
➠ 119
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
ENT, Speech and Hearing
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Facial Nerve
Palsy
‘Cranial nerve disorders such as Bell’s
palsy‘
Causes, natural history and
management of facial nerve palsy
(Bell’s palsy)
2 	Acute Otitis
Media
‘Ear disorders: earache and discharge
including otitis externa and media with
and without effusion‘
Management of otitis media and
externa
3 	Deafness and
Tinnitus
‘Hearing problems including deafness
such as occupational, presbycusis,
otosclerosis, tinnitus and associated
speech or language disorders‘ ‘Ensure
that a patient’s hearing impairment
or deafness does not prejudice the
information communicated or your
attitude as a doctor towards the patient
and be able to communicate effectively‘
Deafness and tinnitus
Weber and Rinne’s test
4 	Sinusitis 	‘Sinus problems including acute and
chronic infection‘
Management of sinusitis
5 	BPPV 	‘Vertigo – including BPPV‘
‘Dix–Hallpike test to diagnose BPPV‘
‘The Epley manoeuvre‘
Causes and management of BPPV
Assessment using Dix–Hallpike test
Epley manoeuvre
Extra
Notes
ENT 2WW and
Emergencies
‘Relevant local and national guidelines
including fast track referral guidance for
suspected cancer‘
‘Upper respiratory infections including…
epiglottitis‘
Suspected cancer
Referral criteria
Unilateral deafness
Epiglottitis
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
ENT, Speech and Hearing
Learning points in this chapter
include:
Complete	CompleteMRCGPRCA/CSA revision course

-- 134 of 575 --

CHAPTER 5 REFERENCES
Facial Nerve Palsy
1. 	NICE CKS. Bell’s palsy. http://cks.nice.org.uk/bells-palsy. May 2019.
2. 	http://patient.info/health/bells-palsy
3. 	Margabanthu G., Brooks J., Barron D, Miller P. Facial palsy as a presenting feature of coarctation of aorta. Interact
Cardiovasc Torac Surg 2003; 2: 91–3.
4. 	Peitersen E. Te natural history of Bell’s palsy. Am J Otol 1982; 4: 107–11.
Acute Otitis Media
1. 	NICE CKS. Otitis media – acute. http://cks.nice.org.uk/otitis-media-acute. Jan 2021.
2. 	NICE CKS. Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain#!sce-
nario:5. Aug 2020.
3. 	https://gpnotebook.com/simplepage.cfm?ID=-1576665032
Useful Resource
Patient information leafet: https://patient.info/ears-nose-throat-mouth/earache-ear-pain/
ear-infection-otitis-media#nav-2
Deafness and Tinnitus
1. 	NICE Guideline NG98. Hearing loss in adults. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng98. Jun 2018.
2. 	NICE CKS. Tinnitus. https://cks.nice.org.uk/tinnitus#!scenario. Mar 2020.
Useful Resource
Patient information leafet: https://www.tinnitus.org.uk/pages/category/information-leafets
Sinusitis
1. 	NICE CKS. Sinusitis. http://cks.nice.org.uk/sinusitis. Mar 2021.
Useful Resource
Patient information leafet: http://patient.info/health/acute-sinusitis
BPPV
1. 	NICE CKS. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. http://cks.nice.org.uk/benign-paroxysmal-positional-vertigo.
Oct 2017.
2. 	http://patient.info/doctor/vertebrobasilar-occlusion-and-vertebral-artery-syndrome
3. 	http://www.thebsa.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/HM.pdf
Useful Resource
Patient information leafet: http://patient.info/health/benign-paroxysmal-positional-vertigo-leafet
ENT 2WW and Emergencies
1. 	NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
2. 	NICE CKS. Hearing loss in adults. https://cks.nice.org.uk/hearing-loss-in-adults#!scenario. Sept 2019.
3. 	NICE Guidelines. Sore throat – acute. http://cks.nice.org.uk/sore-throat-acute#!diagnosisadditional:6. Jan 2021.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 120
ENT, Speech and Hearing

-- 135 of 575 --

➠ 121
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Mike Williams 	55 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Medications 	Ramipril 5 mg daily
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Recent consultation with PN – BP well controlled.
Calculated CVD risk 12% – statins discussed but patient declined.
Medication reauthorised for 3 months.
Investigations 	3 months ago. Normal U&E. Total cholesterol 6.1 mmol/L,
ratio 2.2.
Household 	Barbara Williams 	55 years 	F

-- 136 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Facial Nerve Palsy
Open ☐ 	Mr Williams, it’s good to meet you. I’m sorry to see you looking so concerned and with
this weakness in your face. Tell me how it started. Have you noticed anything else? How is
your health generally?
History ☐ 	Any earache? Any deafness or dizziness? I notice you have high BP. Can I check if you’ve
been taking your medication? And tell me more about you. Do you have family or friends
around you? Tell me about your work.
Sense ☐ 	I can see how concerned and upset you are and understandably so.
ICE ☐ 	You are worried this is a stroke. Do you have any other thoughts or worries? Did you have
anything in mind you hoped I might be able to do for you today?
Flags ☐ 	I need to ensure this problem is confned to the nerve in your face. Are your arms and legs
feeling and working normally? Any problems with your vision? Are you able to wrinkle
your forehead? Any problems with your speech?
Curious ☐ 	Have you known this happen to anyone else? Were your father’s symptoms the same or
diferent?
Impact ☐ 	I understand you want this to resolve as quickly as possible. How might this problem afect
you?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you woke up this morning with a lopsided face, blinking is difcult and you
have been drooling from your mouth. You are worried it might be a stroke due to your BP
and your father’s history, but also because you don’t take medication for cholesterol. You
fear how this looks to others and want to do whatever is required to help you return to work
as soon as possible. Have I missed anything out?
O/E ☐ 	I would like to check your BP, examine the nerves in your face, both ears and your mouth
and check for lumps around the ear. Is that okay?
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate this is distressing. It’s very unpleasant for you to have your face afected like
this.
InCludE ☐ 	I understand why you questioned a stroke, but thankfully it isn’t.
Impression ☐ 	We call this Bell’s palsy – it’s a temporary weakness of the face nerve.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of Bell’s palsy? Do you know anyone who has had it?
Explanation ☐ In Bell’s palsy, the facial nerve suddenly stops sending normal electrical impulses to the
muscles in the face so they can’t work normally. We don’t know what causes it, although
it may be a virus. Most people make a full recovery over a period of weeks or months and
only a few are lef with any lasting weakness. If there were 100 people like you, 71 would
make a full and complete recovery, 13 would have a little weakness and just 16 would have
lasting facial weakness.
Recommend ☐ We know that taking steroid tablets for about 10 days may help this to get better quicker.
Tis is what I would suggest. How do you feel about that? I recommend prednisolone 50 mg
daily for 10 days.
Options ☐ 	You are correct – steroids may increase your BP temporarily. Like any treatment, we need to
weigh up the benefts against the risks. Your BP is nicely controlled so I am happy for you
to take the steroids. What do you think? We also need to protect your eye as the surface of
the eye can become too dry. I’m going to prescribe some lubricants and an eye pad to use
at night.
InCludE ☐ 	Antivirals? A good thought, but unfortunately it’s been found that they don’t work.
Empower ☐ 	I’m going to give you a leafet to read about Bell’s palsy.
Future ☐ 	Come back and see a GP in a week when you have fnished the tablets.
Safety net ☐ 	If you feel you are getting worse, or if the eye becomes sore or if the other side of your face
becomes afected, see the GP the same day or ring 111 if it is out of hours. I don’t think this
will happen, but if your arm, leg or other parts of your body become weak, call 999 straight
away.
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 1	
➠ 122

-- 137 of 575 --

Patient’s Story 	Facial Nerve Palsy
Doctor’s notes Mike Williams, 55 years. PMH: hypertension. Medication: ramipril. All well at a routine
➠ 123
check with the nurse 3 months ago. Medication renewed. Statins declined.
How to act 	Very worried.
PC 	‘I woke up this morning and my face is lopsided. Have I had a stroke?’
History 	You realised you are drooling at the mouth and can’t move the lef side of your face. You
have no other neurological symptoms and you feel well in yourself.
You were diagnosed with hypertension 5 years ago. You mostly (but not always) remember
to take ramipril. Te nurse discussed statins but you had read they cause leg cramps and
didn’t think you needed them.
Family history of stroke – father died of this 2 years ago.
Social 	You live with your wife. You have no children. You work at a local stately home, showing
visitors around. Money is tight as your wife lost her job. Never smoked. Minimal alcohol.
ICE 	You believe you have had a stroke. You have no other thoughts of what may be causing this.
You are angry at yourself for declining the statin.
Before your father died you saw a change in him mentally as well as physically, which was
upsetting to see.
You work with the public and you fear what people may think. Whatever is wrong you want
to get back to work soon. You don’t think you get sick pay.
If the doctor mentions this might be ‘a virus’ you will ask for antiviral drugs to get better
as quickly as you can. If the doctor mentions steroids, you would be concerned they would
push your BP up.
Examination 	CN VII – asymmetry visible. Lef side – face drooping and cannot close eye or blink.
Only if specifcally asked, lef side of forehead is afected – does not wrinkle when asked to
‘screw up face or raise eyebrows’.
BP 130/70.
Ears and mouth – NAD.
No parotid swelling.
Questions 	‘Will this get better? Will the other side of my face go the same way?’
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 1

-- 138 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Bell’s palsy
Te most common cause of facial weakness. Unilateral, comes on rapidly. Can make the diagnosis on symp-
toms/signs if no other medical cause can be found.1
Cause 	A problem with facial (VII) nerve at the geniculate ganglion. Cause unknown but ?viral
?reactivation (herpes or varicella).
Epidemiology 	Typical age group: 15–45. Equally common in men and women.1
Risk factors 	Diabetes, hypertension or obesity. Also, if pregnant or immunocompromised. Upper res-
piratory tract infections.
Symptoms 	Rapid onset of a unilateral facial weakness with drooling and excessive tears.
Investigations 	No routine tests needed for new onset Bell’s palsy in primary care.1
Prognosis 	Recovery generally starts in 2 weeks, but may take up to 12 months to fully resolve.2
Treatment 	1. Reassure that the outlook is good. Likely to recover fully within 3–4 months.
2. Corneal protection essential – lubricant drops/ointment at night/eyepatch.
3. Consider prednisolone, if patient presents within 72 hours. Options:
50 mg for 10 days
60 mg for 5 days, then taper down by 10 mg each day for 5 days
4. Antivirals not recommended as no evidence that they make any diference.
Differential diagnosis – rare but serious conditions
Stroke 	Remember that in an UMN lesion, the forehead is generally spared due to dual
innervation.
Cancer 	Consider tumours of brain, facial nerve, parotid gland, skin tumour, facial nerve,
malignant otitis externa.
Cholesteatoma 	Hearing loss + foul smelling discharge from the ear.1
Trauma 	E.g. afer surgery, or fracture of the base of the skull.
Coarctation 	Raised BP, high level of suspicion in children.
Reports of Bell’s palsy + HTN leading to detection of underlying coarctation of aorta.3
Lyme disease 	If a rash or symptoms of Lyme disease has been present.
Referral 	To neurology or ENT if: any doubt about diagnosis, neurological symptoms getting worse
or no improvement within 3 weeks or if suspect serious underlying problem such as parotid
tumour or cholesteatoma.1
To ophthalmology: if the person has troublesome eye symptoms (for example, pain, itch-
iness or irritation.1
A study of 1011 patients1,4 	71% complete recovery
84% complete or near complete recovery
16% permanent defcit of facial function
➠ 124
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 1

-- 139 of 575 --

➠ 125
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Sarah Smith 	5 years 	F
PMH 	None
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Darren Smith 	34 years 	M
Natasha Smith 	33 years 	F
Charlie Smith 	9 years 	M
Sarah attends the GP with her mum today.

-- 140 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Acute Otitis Media
Open ☐ 	Hello Sarah, hello Mrs Smith. Oh, I’m so sorry to hear you’ve got earache – that’s horrid isn’t it?
Sarah, tell me how it feels. Mum, can you tell me more about her earache? Anything else that
you have noticed?
History ☐ 	Have you tried any medicine? How is Sarah’s health? Any problems at birth? Any concern in
the past with hearing or development? Is she fully immunised? Is she allergic to any medicines?
Who is at home? What do you both do for a living?
Flags ☐ 	Is Sarah drinking okay? Any signs that she can’t hear so well? Has she had a high temperature?
When did this start? Do the fevers go down with pain relief? Is she moving her neck and looking
at lights okay? Any concerns with her breathing? Rashes? Good, it sounds like the rest of you is
okay, Sarah, but we need to look at your ears!
Risk ☐ 	Does anyone in the family have any ear problems?
Sense ☐ 	It’s rare that you need to bring Sarah to see us and I sense you must be concerned about her.
ICE ☐ 	May I ask if you’ve come across ear infections before? Did anything particularly worry you about
Sarah? Did you have anything in mind that I might be able to prescribe or do for Sarah today?
Impact ☐ 	Has Sarah needed time of school? Has that been difcult for you, for example with your own
work?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned that you are not keen at all on antibiotics. May I ask why you prefer to avoid
them? I’m sorry to hear about Charlie’s experience but I can tell you that allergies don’t normally
run in families.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise so far, Sarah is healthy but has had earache for 5 days. You were hoping to avoid
antibiotics due to previous experience. You feel this is likely to be a virus but you would like to
check there are no complications developing, like mastoiditis which you have read about. Have
I understood correctly?
O/E ☐ 	I’d like to check Sarah’s temperature and pulse, look at the throat and ears, check she has no
swellings and listen to her chest. Is that okay with you, Sarah? Would you like to sit on Mum’s
knee while I have a look?
Empathy ☐ 	Te ear drums are red and look sore. Tere is pus in the lef ear suggesting the eardrum may
have popped due to the infection. Te mastoid bone is not painful, which is reassuring.
Impression ☐ 	My impression is that she has a middle ear infection causing a temperature.
Experience ☐ 	What is your experience of ear infections…or with friends’ children?
Explanation ☐ 	Te fact that Sarah has had a cold for 2 weeks and now earache for 5 days with no improvement
despite regular pain relief, and the discharge in her ear canal, makes me think it is more likely
a bacterial infection.
InCludE ☐ 	Terefore, although I know you aren’t keen on antibiotics, they should help. Tankfully the
mastoid bone does not appear afected. What are your thoughts? Grommets may be inserted
with repeated ear infections where the fuid build-up may prevent hearing development.
Recommend ☐ Like you, I’m keen to only use antibiotics when they are really needed but I do think that Sarah
needs them and this is what I would suggest.
Options ☐ 	Research suggests that afer 4 days of symptoms antibiotics are more likely to be necessary. A
fever and pus also suggest it is not clearing. What are your thoughts now? Okay, I will issue
amoxicillin.
Empower ☐ 	Please give this antibiotic three times a day for 5 days. Here is a leafet on children’s ear infections.
Future ☐ 	I expect her to start getting better in a couple of days. It would be helpful to see her again in
about 6 weeks to make sure the eardrum has healed. In the meantime, don’t put anything into
the lef ear and keep it dry.
Safety net ☐ 	If, however, she gets worse please bring her back.
Specifcs ☐ 	For example, a fever which does not come down with paracetamol/ibuprofen or ongoing
symptoms afer completion of the antibiotics, a swelling behind the ear, pain moving the neck,
breathing problems suggesting a chest infection or hearing problems.
➠ 126
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 2

-- 141 of 575 --

➠ 127	
Patient’s Story 	Acute Otitis Media
Doctor’s notes Sarah Smith, 5 years. Attending with mum, Natasha Smith, aged 33 years.
PMH: none. Medications: none.
How to act 	Caring, articulate, sure of yourself and going to stand your ground.
PC 	‘She’s had earache for the past 5 days. I just wanted you to check her out, please.’
History 	Sarah can tell you it hurts but then looks to Mum.
Sarah has had a cold for a couple of weeks and started with bilateral earache about 5 days
ago, L>R. You thought this might be something she had caught at school. You have been
giving her regular paracetamol and ibuprofen but with no real improvement. You noticed
some discharge in her ear canal this morning. She has had a fever since last night but it
settled with analgesia.
Tere are no lower respiratory symptoms.
She is a little miserable and of food but drinking and passing urine.
No symptoms of meningitis.
She seems able to hear normally but keeps pulling at her ears.
Social 	Two-parent family. Dad is an accountant and mum is a part-time teacher. One older child:
Charlie, aged 9 years.
ICE 	Most ear infections are viral. Antibiotics should be avoided because they interfere with your
immune system. Charlie got a rash with amoxicillin and is now ‘allergic’ to it. It didn’t seem
to make him any better.
Sarah has never had antibiotics and you don’t intend her to start now.
Deep down you believe she is fne, you have experience with children, but when it’s your
own you doubt your judgement and want an opinion. You looked on the internet and
started reading about the mastoid bone. You would like reassurance this bone is okay.
If antibiotics are ofered, you will refuse them. ‘Are you sure? She’s never had antibiotics
and I don’t want her to have them now.’
Understanding You have read that it is much better for children to make their own antibodies to infections.
You have known some children tell you they have had an operation for grommets.
Ask the doctor ‘When is the grommet operation necessary?’
Examination 	Temperature 38.5°C. HR 100 bpm. Troat red, both ear drums very red, discharge in lef
ear canal, chest clear.
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 2

-- 142 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Acute Otitis Media
Managing patients who present with ear infections1,2
Advice for everyone with acute otitis media
• 	Reduced hearing may be present for a few days.
• 	High temperature is common.
• 	Symptoms usually last 3 days but can be up to 7 days.
• 	Use regular paracetamol or ibuprofen – appropriate for age.
• 	Drink plenty of fuids, eat normally, if you can.
• 	Decongestants and antihistamines probably don’t work.
If unwell:
Think about admission
• 	Under 3 months of age or 3–6 months of age with a temperature of >39°C – hot and irritable.
Immediate admission
• 	If very unwell, e.g. severe systemic infection.
• 	If you suspect complications:
• 	Infective – intracranial abscess, meningitis or mastoiditis.
• 	Neurological – facial nerve paralysis.
• 	Vascular – sinus thrombosis.
• 	Children <3 months with temperature >38°C.
Antibiotics1,3
Note that crying and pain are ofen a lot less from day 2, regardless of treatment with antibiotics.
Use immediately – very unwell, symptoms of a more serious illness or complication, or high risk of complications.
Consider antibiotics if age <2, symptoms for more than 3 days or otorrhoea but remember possible adverse efects
of antibiotics. Options are:
• 	No antibiotic + advice to seek help if symptoms worsen, not improving in 3 days or becomes very unwell.
• 	Prescription for antibiotic to get if needed + above advice.
• 	Immediate antibiotic + above advice.
Antibiotic of choice: 5–7day course of amoxicillin, or erythromycin if allergic to penicillin. Note erythromycin less
efective against H. infuenzae. Can also use azithromycin or clarithromycin – efective against all main bacteria
that cause acute otitis media.1,3
If symptoms worsen, think about:
• 	Resistance to antibiotic – has one been used previously?
• 	Could this be glue ear?
• 	Are there symptoms or signs that might suggest a more serious diagnosis?
Note there is some evidence that use of antibiotics is linked to reduced middle ear efusions afer 3 months.3
Follow-up
Routine follow-up is not required.
Learning point – making assumptions about expectations
It is easy to jump to assumptions; for example, that the mum of a hot poorly child is wanting antibiotics but, as
in this case, that is not always the situation. Always keep an open mind and check the patient’s thoughts, fears
and hopes (ICE) so that you are informed rather than surprised and you can tailor your explanation and shared
management plan appropriately.
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 2	
➠ 128

-- 143 of 575 --

➠ 129
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Anthony Warren 	52 years 	M
PMH 	Vasectomy 5 years ago
Medications 	None
Allergies 	None
Consultations 	Nil recent
Investigations 	None
Household 	Julie Warren 	45 years 	F
Emma Warren 	12 years 	F
Daniel Warren 	9 years 	M

-- 144 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Deafness and Tinnitus
Open ☐ 	Hello Mr Warren – I’m very sorry to hear that. Please tell me more about your hearing. And
tell me what others have noticed – for example your wife and children.
ICE ☐ 	What has your wife noticed? And what worries you most? Did you have anything in your
mind you thought I might be able to do today?
History ☐ 	A few questions about the deafness. How did this start? When are you most afected?
Any situations when it seems particularly bad? Any ringing in the ears? What is it like?
When do you notice this?
Flags ☐ 	Are both ears afected or just one? Any discharge or pain in the ears? Has your nose been
blocked? Have you had any nose bleeds? Any episodes of dizziness or loss of balance? Any
blurring of vision or weakness or numbness of arms and legs?
Impact ☐ 	Tell me how this is afecting you – in your job at school and your home life.
Risk ☐ 	Please tell me about your work over the years. Have you ever worked in a noisy environ-
ment? Do you have any hobbies that involve noise? Do you scuba dive? Do you take any
medications? Anyone in the family with hearing problems?
Experience ☐ 	I’m interested to know more about your father.
Empathy ☐ 	I’m sorry to hear that – he must have felt very isolated.
Curious ☐ 	What do you know about deafness? Are there any students at school who are deaf?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you are embarrassed about this as well as frustrated at how it afects you.
O/E ☐ 	First, I would like to look in both ears with a special torch called an otoscope. Tank you.
Both ears look normal, there is no wax and the drums are shiny and healthy. Now I want
to do two tests with a tuning fork. I’m going to make the fork ring and then put it on the
middle of your forehead. Please tell me whether you hear it louder on the lef or on the
right, or both the same. Tank you. Now I’m going to ring the fork again and place it on
your mastoid bone on each side, here. Please tell me when it stops ringing. I’m then going
to put it next to your ear. If you can still hear it, please show me by raising your hand and
then tell me when it stops.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, for several years you have noticed a bit of a problem with your hearing, but
others have noticed it more and you feel it’s time to get some help.
Impression ☐ 	I think you have what we call sensorineural hearing loss.
Explanation ☐ Tis means that the tiny hairs in the ear, or the nerves to the ear are not working well so
that the nerve signals that transmit the sound are weaker, causing deafness. Te ringing in
your ears is called tinnitus and it is very common in sensorineural deafness.
Empathy ☐ 	It must be very upsetting – your work is afected and you are worried you may go very deaf
and become isolated like your father. And children can be so cruel.
Recommend ☐ I recommend that we refer you to get a hearing assessment called an audiogram. Te hearing
technicians will be able to recommend and prescribe a hearing aid for you.
InCludE ☐ 	I know this isn’t what you hoped for but modern hearing aids are small and discrete. How
do you feel about this now? It will take some getting used to but try and persist – it should
really help.
Options 	For the tinnitus, I would like to give you a PIL from the British Tinnitus Association. Tere
are lots of suggestions to try, such as having a little background noise at night, e.g. the radio
at very low volume. I would also like to check your BP, cholesterol and blood sugar – please
see the PN for this.
Empower ☐ 	Tere are some things you can do to help. Please protect your hearing by always using good
ear protection in a noisy environment, for example when playing at concerts.
Future ☐ 	Please come back to see me afer you have been to audiology and we can discuss their fndings.
Safety net ☐ 	If you have a sudden change in hearing or develop severe earache, discharge, nosebleeds,
dizziness or any weakness or numbness in your face or limbs, please see a doctor straight
away.
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 3	
➠ 130

-- 145 of 575 --

➠ 131	
Patient’s Story 	Deafness and Tinnitus
Doctor’s notes Anthony Warren, 52 years. PMH: vasectomy. Medications: none.
How to act 	Concerned, embarrassed. If the doctor does not face you and speak clearly, you will struggle
to hear what he or she says and will need to ask him or her to repeat themselves.
PC 	‘Te wife thinks I’m deaf. She’s wondering if something can be done.’
History 	For the last few years you have noticed increasing problems with your hearing. At home
you have to have the TV louder than everyone else would like. Your wife remarks that you
ofen don’t hear her and are always saying ‘Pardon?’ At school the classroom can be noisy
and you don’t always hear what the students say. Your daughter Emma recently started at
the school and has told you that other students laugh and snigger about your hearing and
call you ‘Dodo’, or ‘Deaf as a dodo’. She is embarrassed about this. Your father went very
deaf at a relatively young age and you remember how socially isolated he became, almost a
recluse and cut of from the family. You also have bilateral tinnitus and notice this especially
at night when it’s quiet and trying to sleep. In fact, you wondered if it was the neighbour’s
burglar alarm, but your wife couldn’t hear it at all.
Social 	History teacher at local comprehensive school. Enjoyable but really tough school with
challenging students. You live with your wife and two children. She is a hairdresser. Social
drinker, never smoked. Hobbies – play guitar with a local band. Gigs once a fortnight, ofen
noisy.
ICE 	Ideas – ‘I am going deaf like my father. It must be inherited. Tere’s probably nothing that
can be done to help.’
Concerns – ‘How am I going to do my job? I don’t really want to wear a hearing aid as I
fear the students would tease me about this.’
Expectations – Possibly a referral to ENT.
Examination
fndings 	Both ears – no wax, canals clear, ear drums normal and shiny. Weber’s and Rinne’s show
sensorineural deafness, bilateral. No neck lumps.
Weber’s – the tuning fork is heard equally loudly in both ears.
Rinne’s – can hear the tuning fork afer it is removed from the mastoid, but only for
a few seconds. L=R.
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 3

-- 146 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Deafness and Tinnitus1,2
Deafness
Red fags 	Unilateral.
Sudden onset.
Fluctuating hearing levels.
Persistent tinnitus, especially if pulsatile or causing distress.
Immediate referral 	NICE advise if:
• 	Sudden onset (3 days or less) severe sensorineural deafness. May be viral
but oral steroids may be needed.
• 	Hearing loss with facial droop – urgent admission ENT, or stroke pathway
if stroke suspected.
• 	Immunocompromised + deafness + otalgia + discharge with no response
to 72 hours of treatment.
2WW referral 	Unilateral progressive deafness especially with vertigo and/or tinnitus.
Nasal obstruction and epistaxis with persistent unexplained hearing loss may
mean post-nasal space tumour.
Adults of Chinese or Southeast Asian heritage with hearing loss and middle
ear efusion not associated with infection.
Adults with dementia,
learning disability,
cognitive impairment 	Consider audiology referral for assessment then every 2 years for hearing test.
Examination 	Ear drums and canals, palpate neck for lumps. Use Weber’s/Rinne’s to difer-
entiate sensorineural form conductive hearing loss.
Sensorineural hearing loss Caused by damage to acoustic nerve, the cochlea or the hair cells.
Risk factors – age, noise exposure, atherosclerosis, smoking.
Conductive hearing loss 	Caused by ear wax, perforated ear drum, problems with ossicles.
Weber’s 	Unilateral conductive loss – sound is louder in afected ear.
Unilateral sensorineural hearing loss – sound louder in non-afected ear.
Heard equally in both – normal hearing or hearing loss is bilateral.
Rinne’s 	Air conduction better than bone conduction (AC > BC) – normal hearing or
sensorineural deafness.
BC > AC – conductive deafness.
Treatment 	Encourage early use of hearing aid. May need persistence.
Tinnitus
Urgent referral 	Unilateral; pulsatile; associated with unilateral hearing loss; associated with
persistent otalgia.
Treatment 	Reassure, treat cause if possible, check medications and review, discuss sound
therapy, refer for counselling or CBT.
➠ 132
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 3

-- 147 of 575 --

➠ 133
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Jennifer Richards 	39 years 	F
PMH 	Two normal vaginal deliveries
Upper respiratory tract infection
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Medications 	Rigevidon
Consultations 	Routine pill check with practice nurse 2 months ago – all well
Investigations 	BP 2 months ago 102/60
Household 	Alan Richards 	30 years 	M
Louis Richards 	10 years 	M
Amy Richards 	8 years 	F

-- 148 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Sinusitis
Open ☐ 	Hello Mrs Richards. Oh, I am sorry to hear that. Please tell me more about how your sinus-
itis started this time and what symptoms you are getting.
History ☐ 	Tell me about the nasal discharge. Clear? Green? Any headaches – whereabouts? Has this
happened before? Please tell me about any medical problems in the past. Have you tried
any medication for this?
Flags ☐ 	Does the light bother you? On a scale of 1–10, how bad are the headaches? Do you feel ill?
Any double vision? Have you had a fever?
Sense ☐ 	You sound quite tense and upset at the moment. Tell me what’s going on in your life as well
as the sinus pain?
Impact ☐ 	How is the sinusitis afecting you at home and work?
Curious ☐ 	Tell me about school and the pressures at work. What do you teach? How long for? Are you
busy at home too? Do you have support there?
ICE ☐ 	You mentioned you had sinusitis before and it didn’t get better with a normal antibiotic and
you were prescribed a powerful one. Tell me – what worries you about the sinusitis? As well
as antibiotics, was there anything else you were hoping I could do to help?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise so far, you had a cold for about a week and now facial pain and discharge
for 3 days which is not getting better with paracetamol. Tere’s pressure in your face and
pressure in your life too as Ofsted are coming in 3 days and it’s important to be at your best
and do well.
O/E ☐ 	Do you have a thermometer? Could you check your temperature for me? Could you press
over your forehead and cheeks and either side of your nose? Any soreness? Could you bend
forward and see if this makes the pain worse?
Empathy ☐ 	Feeling lousy with facial pain and headaches must be pretty miserable, especially with the
stress of an imminent Ofsted visit.
Impression ☐ 	From what you’ve told me, I think you are absolutely right – you have sinusitis.
Explanation ☐ To be honest, it’s far more likely to be viral than bacterial and there is no evidence that
antibiotics make any diference for people like you who are normally ft and well.
InCludE ☐ 	I suspect that last time you got better despite the antibiotics rather than because of them.
Let’s talk about how we can have you feeling better as soon as possible.
Options ☐ 	I will talk you through some self-help measures. I don’t want to prescribe antibiotics because
all the evidence suggests that they will make no diference and they may give you diarrhoea
and contribute to drug resistance.
Empower ☐ 	I will text you a link to a PIL that describes things you can do that will make a diference.
Recommend ☐ My recommendation is regular fuids and pain relief, warm facial compresses, salt solution
for your nose, and a decongestant spray. Breathing in steam probably doesn’t help. You may
wish to try nasal douching. People either love it because it fushes out the sinus passages or
hate it because squirting salty water into your nose isn’t pleasant.
Future ☐ 	Tis should get fully better within 2–3 weeks and, with the treatment, you should start to
feel better soon.
Specifcs ☐ 	If you are not fully better in 2–3 weeks or if you get bad headaches, a temperature or feel
really ill, book an appointment to see me straight away.
Safety net ☐ 	If this happens out of hours, phone 111.
➠ 134
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 4

-- 149 of 575 --

➠ 135	
Patient’s Story 	Sinusitis
Doctor’s notes Jennifer Richards, 39 years. Two pregnancies and URTI in past. On combined pill for con-
traception (Rigevidon).
How to act 	Anxious, demanding.
PC 	‘I won’t keep you long, Doctor. It’s my sinusitis again – I just need antibiotics.’
History 	Sore throat and runny nose for a week, self-medicated with paracetamol. Last 3 days,
increasing nasal discharge (sometimes clear, sometimes green) and facial pain. Some
headaches: frontal, worse when you bend your head forwards. You’ve had headaches for a
few weeks anyway and think it is work stress.
Paracetamol has been useless.
Social 	Married with two children. English teacher at local secondary school. Ofsted inspection
in 3 days’ time – school was ‘failing’ last time, pressure to do better this time, otherwise the
school might close and you could lose your job.
You rarely drink alcohol and do not smoke.
ICE 	You know that doctors are reluctant to prescribe antibiotics but you don’t ask for them ofen
and this time you really need them as you believe they will make you better quicker. Last
time you had amoxicillin and it didn’t do anything and you had to come back for stronger
ones (cefalexin) which made the sinusitis better afer a week.
Ask the doctor If refused antibiotics: ‘What can I do? I need to be on top of this in 3 days when the inspectors
come.’
If given antibiotics: ‘What do I need to do about contraception? Will they interfere with
my pill?’
If ofered amoxicillin: ‘It does not work and I need cefalexin.’
Examination 	Temperature 37.2°C. Tender in forehead and cheeks, worse when you bend forward.
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 4

-- 150 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Sinusitis
Acute sinusitis1
‘Acute sinusitis usually follows a common cold, and is defned as an increase in symptoms afer 5 days, or
persistence of symptoms beyond 10 days, but less than 12 weeks.’1
Usual management1
Paracetamol and/or ibuprofen (relieve symptoms by reducing pain and temperature).
Consider irrigating nose with saline solution.
Some may wish to try intranasal decongestant, e.g. spray (OTC) – but no evidence to support use. Oral
decongestant not recommended.
No proven beneft1
Steam inhalation, antihistamines, mucolytics, warm face packs.
Antibiotics
Not needed if symptoms for <10 days unless patient is systemically very unwell, has symptoms and signs of
a more serious illness or condition, or is at high risk of complications.
May consider if symptoms >10 days, but remember adverse efects of antibiotics and that antibiotics makes
little diference to how long symptoms last.
Adults: phenoxymethylpenicillin 500 mg QDS for 5 days, or co-amoxiclav 500/125 TDS for 5 days or
doxycycline or clarithromycin if allergic to penicillin.
Children and young people <18 – choice of antibiotic as above in age-appropriate dose but doxycycline
contraindicated in <12 years.
Nasal corticosteroids (see NICE guidance for further details)
Afer 10 days of symptoms, consider prescribing high-dose nasal corticosteroid for 14 days, e.g. mometasone
20 mg BD (of label use) in adults and children >12 years.
Rare but important complications needing admission1
Severe systemic infection.
Orbital involvement (double vision, oculomotor nerve paralysis, eyeball displaced, new ↓visual acuity).
Intracranial involvement with symptoms/signs of meningitis, frontal bone swelling, severe fontal headache
or focal neurological signs.
Chronic sinusitis1
Consider if nasal blockage/discharge with facial pain/headache and/or loss of smell for >12 weeks.
Associated with atopy, asthma, immunosuppression.
Manage with above measures but also consider 3 months of intranasal corticosteroids.
Consider referral to ENT if:
• 	3 months’ trial of intranasal corticosteroids + above measures are inefective.
• 	Unilateral symptoms.
• 	Nasal polyps especially in children.
• 	Recurrent episodes of otitis media + pneumonia in children.
• 	Unusual opportunistic symptoms.
• 	Symptoms interfering with quality of life.
• 	Allergic or immunological risk factors that need investigation.
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 4	
➠ 136

-- 151 of 575 --

➠ 137
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Freda White 	60 years 	F
PMH 	Type 2 diabetes
Medications 	Metformin, gliclazide
Allergies 	No known allergies
Consultations 	Diabetes check 1 month ago – all well
Investigations 	1 month ago HbA1c 54 mmol/mol. Lipid profle normal.
U&E normal
BP 130/70
No microalbuminuria
Household 	Raymond White 	70 years 	M

-- 152 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	BPPV
Open ☐ 	I’m sorry to hear about that. Please tell me more about the dizziness from the beginning.
Tell me how and when this started.
ICE ☐ 	What thoughts have you had about this? Did you worry it may be from the cruise? Did
anything make you worry that there might be something signifcant going on?
History ☐ 	By dizzy do you mean lightheaded or is the room spinning? Do you still have symptoms
now? How long did it last? Have you noticed any triggers? Have you had this before? Apart
from the diabetes, do you have any other signifcant medical problems?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you are very concerned about this and perhaps, particularly, about whether there
is something seriously wrong with you.
Impact ☐ 	Tell me about work. What do you do? Do you need to drive to get to work? How has the
dizziness been afecting things that you normally do at home?
Empathy ☐ 	It must be very unpleasant feeling dizzy and sick so much. I understand your fears about
what this could be and the consequences that not working would bring for your family. No
wonder your husband is concerned.
Curious ☐ 	I’m wondering why you think it may be a tumour; have you read something online?
Flags ☐ 	Have you had any headaches? Have you vomited? Any deafness or ear problems? Any
other symptoms in the chest like pain or palpitations? Any symptoms of the arms or legs
not feeling or working normally? Any ringing in your ears? Does your coordination seem
normal?
Risk ☐ 	How is your diabetes? Blood sugars at home? Has the dizziness made you fall?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, for the last few weeks you have had episodes of the room spinning lasting a
minute or so, worse in bed and in the mornings. You have felt sick but not been sick. You
wondered if it might be a hangover from the cruise or even a brain tumour.
Impression ☐ 	I think your dizziness is coming from the inner ear where there is fuid which tells your
brain which way up you are. Sometimes crystals form in the fuid which then causes con-
fusing messages to be sent to the brain. Te conficting messages from your ears and eyes
causes dizziness, particularly when you change position. We call this benign paroxysmal
positional vertigo. Benign means it’s nothing serious, paroxysmal means it comes and goes,
positional means when you move your head and vertigo means spinning dizziness. We call
it BPPV for short.
Experience☐ 	Have you known anyone with vertigo or dizziness when they move their head?
Explanation ☐ I know that your symptoms are distressing but I don’t think it’s anything serious and it will
get better whatever we do. Most people get better within a few weeks.
Options ☐ 	So we could do nothing, and this will most likely settle on its own, or we could try to get
rid of the crystals by performing a series of neck movements. Tis can make you feel better
very quickly. At least two-thirds of people get better with this treatment. Tere are some
medications which can help with the dizziness, such as cinnarizine, which we could use
short term?
Empower ☐ 	I will text you an information leafet to read about the problem and the treatment, which is
called the Epley manoeuvre. We can do this at the surgery. Let me know and I’ll book you
in. Tink it over and perhaps talk to your husband. Until then, take care in the mornings
and get up slowly. Be careful on stairs. You can drive once you feel safe and the dizziness
stops.
Safety net ☐ 	I would expect the dizziness to start improving – longer intervals between episodes and the
dizziness becoming less severe – but, if for any reason you start to feel worse or something
new happens, please see the doctor.
➠ 138
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 5

-- 153 of 575 --

➠ 139	
Patient’s Story 	BPPV
Doctor’s notes Freda White, 60 years. PMH: type 2 diabetes. Diabetes check 1 month ago, all well.
Medications: metformin, gliclazide. HbA1c 54 mmol/mol. Lipid profle normal. U&E
normal. BP 130/70. No microalbuminuria.
How to act 	Concerned.
PC 	‘I woke up feeling dreadfully dizzy and sick this morning. It isn’t the frst time.’
History 	For the last few weeks you have had frequent episodes of suddenly feeling dizzy. If asked
more about the dizziness – the room is spinning. Te episodes last less than a minute each
but are unpredictable. However, you have noticed that it comes on when you roll over in
bed. Your house has stairs and you nearly fell down them this morning as you were going
down to make a cup of tea. It seems to be worse in the morning. You have never had serious
problems with your neck. You have always been well.
You have no cardiac or neurological symptoms. You have not vomited. You have no ear
symptoms including pain or discharge.
Social 	Cleaner at the local primary school. Husband older and retired factory worker. No alcohol
and never smoked.
ICE 	You are worried this is a brain tumour. One of the children at school had one and died
recently and this was very sad for everyone. You think she had dizziness too.
Could it also be to do with getting seasick on a recent cruise (your frst, to celebrate 40 years
of marriage)? Your husband is very worried about you. You want to know what this is and
how to make it better. You are not sure you can work like this and you rely on your wage
to supplement his pension.
Ask the doctor ‘Is it a brain tumour?’
‘Will it get better?’
Examination 	Dix–Hallpike test positive with nystagmus on turning head in each direction. No cerebellar
signs. BP 128/66 sitting and 130/70 standing.
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 5

-- 154 of 575 --

Learning Points 	BPPV
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is a common cause of recurrent dizziness.1
Who? 	Middle-aged (usually >50 years) and older people. Women:men = 2:1.
Symptoms 	Severe dizziness and nausea when head in certain positions (e.g. lying on one side, or face
up in bed). Can feel of balance for several hours afer the dizziness has gone.
Cause 	Otolith particles fall into semicircular canals (especially posterior canal – 85%) and cause
fuid in inner ear to move.
Precipitating
factors 	Spontaneous; ear surgery; head injury; bedrest; post-viral.
Children – migraine.
Diagnosis 	Confrm symptoms of dizziness that are related to the position of the head. Note that attacks
last 20–30 seconds but get better if the head is kept still.
Differential 	Ménière’s disease, anxiety, postural hypotension, viral labyrinthitis, vestibular neuritis,
acoustic neuroma, chronic otitis media, MS, CVA, vertebrobasilar occlusion (patient.co.uk
has a useful description for the doctor2), brain or nasopharyngeal tumours.
Examine 	Tailor the examination to the symptoms. Consider: BP, ears, Dix–Hallpike manoeuvre,
cerebellar signs + full neurological assessment to rule out diferentials.
Treatment 	May resolve with no treatment. Epley manoeuvre, Brandt–Darof exercises.
Contraindications for Dix–Hallpike manoeuvre, Epley manoeuvre and Brandt–Daroff exercises
Absolute 	‘Fractured odontoid peg, recent cervical spine fracture, atlanto-axial subluxation, cervical
disc prolapse, vertebro-basilar insufciency that is known and verifed, recent neck trauma
that restricts torsional movement.’3
Relative 	‘Carotid sinus syncope (consider if history of drop attacks or blackouts), severe back pain,
recent stroke, cardiac bypass within the last 3 months, severe neck pain, rheumatoid arthri-
tis afecting the neck, recent neck surgery, cervical myelopathy, severe back pain, severe
orthopnoea may restrict duration of test.’3
Additional learning point
How much can you do in 10–12 minutes? Taking a history from a patient, using the Dix–Hallpike test
as a diagnostic tool and then treating the patient using an Epley manoeuvre is not realistic in a normal
10–12-minute consultation. Use the opportunity to give the patient a leafet to read about your proposed
treatment and book them in for a separate appointment for treatment sometime soon.
➠ 140
ENT, Speech and Hearing – 5

-- 155 of 575 --

➠ 141	
Extra Notes 	ENT 2WW and Emergencies
2WW referral criteria for suspected ENT, oral and facial cancer
Suspected cancer pathway
Laryngeal1 Age >45 with persistent unexplained hoarseness or unexplained neck lump.
Oral1 Unexplained ulcer in the oral cavity lasting more than 3 weeks or persistent or unexplained lump in
neck.
Tyroid1 Unexplained thyroid lump.
Consider urgent referral (for an appointment within 2 weeks) to a dentist for assessment of possible oral
cancer if persistent red or red and white patch in the mouth or a red or red and white patch in the oral cavity
consistent with erythroplakia or erythroleukoplakia. If assessed by the dentist as having any of these, the
dentist should refer via suspected cancer pathway (2WW).
Emergency ENT problems
Unilateral deafness2 Sudden onset (over 3 days or less) of unilateral deafness that has occurred within the
last 30 days and cannot be explained by external or middle ear causes, may have treatable causes, including
autoimmune disease, chronic infection, vestibular schwannoma and stroke. Early intervention may signif-
icantly improve symptoms.
EMERGENCY: refer within 12 hours as possibility hearing may be restored.
Epiglottitis3 Now more common in adults than children. DO NOT examine the throat – send to hospital
999. Risk of complete airway obstruction.
Adults 	Severe sore throat with painful swallowing. Predictors of airway obstruction are sitting
upright, stridor and breathlessness.
Children 	Tentative, careful breathing (normal respiratory rate).
Tachycardia.
Cry and voice mufed – reluctance to talk.
May have inspiratory stridor and hoarseness.
Drooling.
ENT, Speech and Hearing

-- 156 of 575 --



-- 157 of 575 --

CHAPTER 6 OVERVIEW
Eyes and Vision
➠ 143
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum: Eyes
and Vision
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Blepharitis 	‘Eyelid problems such as blepharitis’
‘Conjunctivitis including infectious causes
(bacterial, viral, parasitic, chlamydial and
allergic causes)’
Management of blepharitis
2 	Squint 	‘Squint – childhood and acquired due to
nerve palsy, amblyopia, blepharospasm’
Causes and management of squint
3 	Acute Glaucoma 	‘Glaucoma – acute, closed angle and
chronic open angle’
Presentation and management of
acute angle closure glaucoma
4 	AMD and
Cataract
‘Recognise how sight loss can interfere
with mobility and lead to social isolation
and diffculty in communication (such as
use of telephones or computers) as well
as the impact of poor eye health on loss
of confdence, mental health, activities of
daily living, independent living and ability
to work’
Presentation and management of
AMD and cataract
5 	Retinal
Detachment
‘Retinal problems including detachment’ 	Presentation and management of
retinal detachment
Extra
Notes
The Red Eye 	‘Red eye – differential diagnoses and
appropriate management including
timescale and urgency’
Differential diagnosis of the red eye

-- 158 of 575 --

CHAPTER 6 REFERENCES
Blepharitis
1. 	NICE CKS. Blepharitis. http://cks.nice.org.uk/blepharitis. Apr 2019.
2. 	http://patient.info/doctor/blepharitis-pro. Dec 2014.
3. 	Patient information leafet: https://www.moorfelds.nhs.uk/condition/blepharitis-0
Squint
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/strabismus-squint. Jun 2015.
2. 	http://patient.info/doctor/amblyopia-pro. Jun 2015.
3. 	http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Squint/Pages/Introduction2.aspx – includes a video of an ophthalmologist describing
squint and its treatment for patients/carers.
4. 	https://www.moorfelds.nhs.uk/sites/default/fles/Atropine%20treatment%20for%20Amblyopia.pdf
Acute Glaucoma
1. 	NICE CKS. Glaucoma. http://cks.nice.org.uk/glaucoma. Nov 2020.
Useful Resources
Patient information leafet: http://patient.info/health/acute-angle-closure-glaucoma. Jul 2018.
Patient information leafet: http://patient.info/health/glaucoma-chronic-open-angle. Jul 2018.
AMD and Cataract
1. 	NICE CKS. Cataracts. http://cks.nice.org.uk/cataracts. Mar 2020.
2. 	NICE CKS. AMD. https://cks.nice.org.uk/macular-degeneration-age-related. Oct 2020.
3. 	http://patient.info/doctor/age-related-macular-degeneration-pro. May 2021.
4. 	DVLA. https://www.gov.uk/driving-eyesight-rules. Contains public sector information licenced under the Open
Government License v3.0.
Useful Resources
Patient information leafet: https://nei.nih.gov/health/maculardegen/armd_facts (available in auditory form and large
text).
Patient information leafet: http://www.rnib.org.uk/eye-health-eye-conditions-z-eye-conditions/cataracts
Retinal Detachment
1. 	NICE CKS. Retinal detachment. http://cks.nice.org.uk/retinal-detachment. Aug 2019.
Useful Resources
Patient information leafet: http://patient.info/health/retinal-detachment-leafet. May 2021.
Patient information leafet:http://www.rnib.org.uk/eye-health-eye-conditions-z-eye-conditions/retinal-detachment.
Patient information leafet: http://www.moorfelds.nhs.uk/condition/retinal-detachment.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 144
Eyes and Vision

-- 159 of 575 --

➠ 145
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Alison Hughes 	50 years 	F
PMH 	NVD aged 31 and 33 years
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	John Hughes 	52 years 	M
Sally Hughes 	19 years 	F
Louise Hughes 	17 years 	F

-- 160 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Blepharitis
Open ☐ 	I’m very sorry to hear that. Please tell me more about your eyes; how did this start and how
long have you had problems?
History ☐ 	Are your eyes sticky all day or just in the mornings? Do you wake up and fnd that they are
closed shut? Any problems focusing? Have you tried anything so far? Do you wear contact
lenses? What sort of lenses are they? Tell me about work. What do you do and where do
you work – is it an air-conditioned environment?
Curious ☐ 	I can see you aren’t wearing your contact lenses today; tell me, why that is? (F2F)
Flags ☐ 	Are both eyes equally afected? How is your eyesight? Any changes recently? Have you seen
your optician for a sight check? Are your eyes sensitive to light?
Risk ☐ 	Does anyone in the family have eye problems? Any skin problems such as dry, red or faky
skin on your face?
Impact ☐ 	Tell me how this is afecting you each day so I can fully understand your situation.
Sense ☐ 	I sense that this is embarrassing, working in the fashion industry where appearances matter.
ICE ☐ 	You wondered if this was conjunctivitis. Did you have any other concerns? Or worries about
your eyesight? You wondered if I could give you antibiotics; was there anything else you
thought might help?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, for a few weeks you have had recurrent stickiness and discharge from both
eyes. You’ve had to leave your lenses out. Your sight is fne. You tried antibiotics but they did
not work. Tis is important to you, and for you at work. It is uncomfortable and unpleasant
to wake up with sticky eyes but, in addition, working in the fashion industry means you
need to look your best and resolve this as soon as possible. You would prefer to wear contact
lenses if possible.
O/E ☐ 	Tank you for sending the photo. I can see the edges of your eyelids are red and faky, but
the white of your eye looks normal.
Empathy ☐ 	It must be embarrassing and difcult having sticky eyes that you have to clean at work.
Impression ☐ 	My impression is that you have an infammation of the eyelid margin, which we call
blepharitis. Te eyes are fne and, in particular, the white part of your eye is not infamed
or infected.
InCludE ☐ 	I don’t think this is conjunctivitis. Also, conjunctivitis would probably have got better with
antibiotic ointment and, as your symptoms haven’t, I don’t think more antibiotics would
help.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of blepharitis or known anyone who has had this?
Explanation ☐ Blepharitis is common and can be managed at home by careful cleaning of the eyelids.
You will need to use warm compresses and buy some baby shampoo to use every day. Try
to avoid eye make-up, if possible. If you must, please use water-soluble products that you
can easily remove. I’m sorry, but you should probably leave your contact lenses out for the
moment. Tankfully, this condition does not put your eyesight at risk.
Options ☐ 	I would like to send you a leafet about blepharitis which gives you advice on how to clean
the eyes. Could I text you the link? I recommend arranging an appointment with your
optician to check for dry eyes and for their professional advice about your contact lenses.
Empower ☐ 	It can be persistent so you will need to continue for a number of weeks or even longer. How
do you feel about what I’ve suggested? Do you have any questions?
Safety net ☐ 	Please come back in 2–3 weeks if this is not working. If you have any new eye symptoms or
are concerned, please come back at any time, or see your optician/contact lens practitioner.
➠ 146
Eyes and Vision – 1

-- 161 of 575 --

Patient’s Story 	Blepharitis
➠ 147
Doctor’s notes Alison Hughes, 50 years. PMH: NVD aged 31 and 33 years. Medications: none.
How to act 	Worried but expecting to be cured with some drops or ointment.
PC 	‘I keep getting conjunctivitis. My eyelids are stuck together every morning. Do I need
antibiotics?’
History 	For the last few weeks you have woken up on most days with sticky eyes. You are usually
a contact lens wearer but have lef them out. Tis has not helped. You went to the chemist
and got ointment (antibiotics) but this did not make much diference. Comments have been
made at work both about you wearing glasses and also about the appearance of your eyes.
Social 	You live with your husband and work as a PA to a fashion editor of a newspaper where it
is important to look good at work. It is an air-conditioned ofce.
ICE 	You believe this is conjunctivitis (your children have had this) and understand it is an
infection. Worried about the appearance of your eyes, you need and expect the doctor to
give some stronger antibiotics to sort this out quickly. You are slightly worried about your
eyesight long term.
You have not come across blepharitis.
Keen to continue to wear contact lenses, you respond negatively if the doctor suggests
leaving them out long term and react with incredulity if doctor suggests baby shampoo.
Examination
or photo sent 	Wearing glasses. Eyelid margins are red and crusty. No redness of conjunctiva.
Questions 	‘Will this get better? How quickly will this happen?’
‘Could it afect my sight?’
‘Do I have to stop wearing contact lenses?’
Reproduced from Corneal Infection and Infammation (2021), CRC Press. With thanks to Rashmi Singh,
Ritika Mukhija, Alisha Kishore, Noopur Gupta and M Vanathi.
Eyes and Vision – 1

-- 162 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Blepharitis
Common eye problem in general practice.
Age 	Typically >40 years, but can be younger.
Symptoms 	Eyelids stuck together in the morning. Eyelashes sticky, greasy or crusty. Gritty sensation
in eyes. Eyelids feel sore. Unable to tolerate contact lenses. Light sensitivity.
Differential
diagnosis 	Other infections, e.g. conjunctivitis, impetigo or cellulitis. Skin problems such as dermatitis
or psoriasis. Rarely – tumours such as actinic keratosis, BCC or SCC.
Two types 	Anterior blepharitis = the base of eyelashes afected.
Posterior blepharitis = Meibomian glands afected.
…but it can be difcult to distinguish between the two types.1
Aetiology 	Staphylococcus. Can be associated with seborrhoeic dermatitis or rosacea. May be linked
to demodex (microscopic mites) – possibly causing sensitivity or irritation to eyelids.2
Management 	Chronic condition, so management rather than cure.
1. Warm compresses to the eyes for 5–10 minutes.
2. Massage the eyelids with a cotton wool bud to loosen oils and crusts.
3. Clean the edge of the eyelids with warm water and a little baby shampoo (1:10 dilution).
Diluted sodium bicarbonate solution is not recommended because it is more likely to
cause irritation.
Recommend the above steps twice daily at frst, then once daily as it improves.
If the above steps do not work, topical antibiotic ointment or cream for 6 weeks can be prescribed.
1st line – chloramphenicol. 2nd line – fusidic acid. 3rd line – oral tetracycline or doxycycline for 6–12 weeks.2
Tere is no clear evidence for steroid drops.
If linked with seborrhoeic dermatitis or dandruf, an antidandruf shampoo for hair and eyebrows may be
needed. If linked with dry eyes, lubricant drops or artifcial tears may be required.
Advise avoiding contact lenses during acute episodes.
Blepharitis and conjunctivitis are two of the most common eye conditions in primary care. Be sure that you
can distinguish between the two and that you can explain about treatment options.
Always ask about contact lens wear as those who do are more prone to get Gram-negative infections. Do
not assume that the patient in front of you always wears glasses!
Remember that a ‘minor’ problem is not necessarily trivial to the patient.
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for useful links to Moorfeld’s Eye Hospital
PILs3
➠ 148
Eyes and Vision – 1

-- 163 of 575 --

➠ 149
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Amena Khalil 	4 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Lilia Khalil 	28 years 	F
Ahmed Khalil 	29 years 	M

-- 164 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Squint
Open ☐ 	How can I help?
History ☐ 	Oh I see. I’m very sorry to hear that. Please tell me more about her eyes. For example, how
did you frst notice this?
Flags ☐ 	Has this stayed much the same or has it got worse? Does she seem to see okay? Can she run
around without tripping and falling? Can she look at books with you?
ICE ☐ 	Do you know anything about eye problems like this? Is there anything you’ve been worried
might be wrong or that you hoped we might be able to do to help?
Risk ☐ 	Has anyone in the family had eye problems? Did Amena injure her eye as a baby?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you are worried about how she looks, about her eyesight and about whether not
being able to get her to a doctor has made things worse.
Impact ☐ 	Tell me what’s been happening in your life recently.
Curious ☐ 	I see you’ve only recently registered with us. How are you getting on in the UK?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, to recap, Amena was fne at birth but, quite soon afer she had an illness with a temper-
ature, you noticed that her eyes were not straight and this has continued, not getting any
better. You are worried about her vision and whether this can be corrected.
Empathy ☐ 	You must have been through such a lot in the last few months; I can’t imagine how difcult
it must have been for you.
O/E ☐ 	Tank you for sending the photo. I can see what you mean as Amena’s right eye is turned
in.
Impression ☐ 	Mrs Khalil, looking at the photo I suspect Amena has a convergent squint.
Experience ☐ 	Can I check that you understand this word ‘squint’? Have you heard about this before?
Squints are very common, about 1 in 20 children have a squint and the good news is that
we should be able to help. Convergent means pointing inwards.
Options ☐ 	I would like to see Amena in the surgery to fully examine her eyes, to check the back of her
eyes, her light refexes and how her eyes move. If this confrms a squint, it would be helpful
get her eyes tested by our eye specialist team at the hospital. Tey may suggest that she
needs to wear glasses or might suggest she wear a patch on one eye to make the weak one
stronger. Tis may well be all she needs but it is possible she might need a small operation
in the future to straighten the eyes.
InCLudE ☐ 	Mrs Khalil, this is not your fault. Tere’s nothing you’ve done wrong or neglected to do, it’s
just bad luck. You haven’t lef it too late for us to help Amena.
Empower ☐ 	We can sort this out for you and there will be nothing to pay; treatment in the UK is free
of charge. You can best help Amena by taking her to her appointments and following the
treatment plan, for example by making sure she wears her glasses and uses an eye patch if
that’s what is recommended for her.
Future ☐ 	Can I make an appointment for you to see me tomorrow? Ten we can decide about the eye
referral. Remember that NHS treatment is all free; there will be nothing to pay. I would also
like to ofer the support of a Health Visitor. Every child in the UK has a Health Visitor from
birth until they attend school to support the mum and child. Ofen, they weigh the child
and answer any questions or concerns you may have. May I ask Julie, our Health Visitor, to
make contact with you? Is there anything else you need? Tere is also a local organisation
called Asylum Welcome, which you may be interested in. Tere are also Children’s Centres
where you can meet other mums with small children. I’ll give you contact details for all of
these tomorrow.
Safety net ☐ 	If for any reason you are unable to make her appointment, please let us know. If her eyes
change, or her sight seems to get worse, please contact a doctor or an optician. Opticians
are available locally, usually at the shopping centres and are also free for children – there is
nothing to pay to have your child seen and tested.
➠ 150
Eyes and Vision – 2

-- 165 of 575 --

➠ 151	
Patient’s Story 	Squint
Doctor’s notes Amena Khalil, 4 years. New patient. PMH: none. Medications: none.
How to act 	[Mum] Worried, ground down, sad.
PC 	‘Her eyes are crossed, Doctor; she cannot look straight. Can anything be done?’
History 	Amena is your frst child. Quite soon afer her birth, your village was overrun by terrorists.
You stayed in increasingly bad conditions for some months and then fed with just a few
possessions and eventually went to a refugee camp, where you have been for 2 years. Tere
was no medical help. You were one of the frst families to be evacuated to the UK. You are
very grateful to be safe but conscious of all the family you have lost and lef behind in Syria:
your parents, brothers, sisters, nephews and nieces. You have a university degree and speak
good English.
Social 	You, your husband and daughter Amena (the patient) are Syrian refugees. You are staying
in temporary housing. A helper there suggested booking a GP appointment.
ICE 	Amena appeared normal at birth but developed ‘crossed eyes’ a few months afer birth, afer
a febrile illness. You knew there was a problem but could not aford medical help and then
there were no doctors in the refugee camp. You fear that not being able to feed her properly
may have made it worse, especially a lack of vitamins. You are worried you have lef it too
late – that she will look like this forever and may not see straight. A friend said that, at 4,
Amena may be too old to have surgery and may not be able to see properly. You have little
money and are unsure whether you will have to pay.
Ask the doctor ‘Can anything be done?’
‘Is it my fault?’
‘Can she see out of that eye?’
‘Will an operation put things right?’
‘Will I need to pay?’
Examination 	PERLA. Convergent squint or see photograph: right eye turned in.
Reproduced from Pediatric Clinical Ophthalmology (2012), CRC Press. With thanks to Scott E. Olitsky and
Leonard B. Nelson.
Eyes and Vision – 2

-- 166 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Squint
Terminology 	Strabismus – any misalignment of the eyes. AKA ‘squint’.1
Amblyopia – decrease in vision caused by an abnormality of vision during eye development
(i.e. frst 2–3 years of life). Common causes are strabismus, congenital cataract and refrac-
tive error. AKA ‘lazy eye’.2
Incidence3 	Squint (strabismus) is common – incidence about 1:20.
Who to refer3 	It is ‘normal’ for eyes not to move together for a few weeks afer birth but, if persisting
longer than the age of 3 months, this needs a referral to a paediatric orthoptist.
Cause3 	Squint can appear from birth or may be acquired later.
Tere can be a genetic link.
Sometimes appears afer febrile illness; however, would have happened anyway.
Complications3 Ofen associated with refraction problems such as long or short sight.
Convergent squint is linked with long sight.
Treatment objectives3
1. Good sight in both eyes.
2. Both eyes working together (3D, stereoscopic vision).
3. Both eyes appear ‘straight’.
Children ofen need glasses, then ‘patching’ of the good eye to make the weaker one stronger. If non-com-
pliant, can use atropine drops to blur vision in the ‘good’ eye.4
Surgery is ofen needed to straighten the eyes. One or more muscles are tightened or detached/reattached.
Tis is generally very successful day-case surgery and recovery is quick. Te eye can feel itchy or sore for a
few days aferwards. Treatment is best started as early as possible and, beyond age 6–7 years, it is difcult
to achieve optimal results. 3D vision is essential for some occupations such as a fre fghter or airline pilot.
Social prescribing
Social prescribing recognises the positive impact that voluntary services can have on a patient or their family.
For example, a patient sufering with depression who is under housing, fnancial and emotional stress
may beneft more from community advice and support than a doctor’s pill. Social prescribing is a service
becoming increasingly available in GP practices and the GP ofen refers to a Social Prescribing Coordinator
employed by the practice and commissioned by the PCN. Te idea behind this is to recognise the social
and psychological needs of the patient and direct patients to available community services with the aim of
increasing quality of life. Local services may include: Citizen’s Advice, Age UK, MIND, Asylum Services,
Children’s Centres, Women’s Centres and hundreds/thousands more. A GP should be aware of the services
available locally (community orientation).
Te patient in this case is an asylum seeker who is not well versed in the structure and processes of the
NHS. It is worth spelling out what may appear obvious to you but not to the patient – for example, that
NHS treatment is free. If the patient is worrying about cost, this may inhibit him or her from attending the
specialist appointment.
➠ 152
Eyes and Vision – 2

-- 167 of 575 --

➠ 153
Doctor’s Notes
Name 	Abida Khan 	70 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No information
Consultations 	Routine elderly person review with nurse – BP 140/90.
Recent consultation with viral URTI – advised to get OTC
preparations from the chemist.
Investigations 	None
Household 	Rashid Khan 	72 years 	M

-- 168 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Acute Glaucoma
Open ☐ 	Hello Mrs Khan. I’m very sorry to hear that. Please tell me more about your eye and the
sickness.
History ☐ 	Have you had this before? How is your vision just now? Are there haloes around lights?
Have you been sick or just felt queasy?
ICE ☐ 	What thoughts have you had about this? Any other worries? Did you have anything in your
mind you thought I might be able to do today?
Impact ☐ 	Tell me a bit about yourself. How has this afected you today, up until coming to see me?
Flags ☐ 	Has anyone in the family had eye problems?
Risk ☐ 	Are you long-sighted or short-sighted? Have you taken any medication at all lately? Do you
ever wear contact lenses? Do you have a history of any bowel or joint problems?
Sense ☐ 	You mentioned your father’s blindness. Are you worried that might happen to you?
Curious ☐ 	You thought you needed antibiotics for your recent cold. Were you annoyed that they
weren’t prescribed?
SummarICE ☐. You went out to the cinema last night and eye symptoms that you’ve had to a lesser extent
for months came on really severely. You fear you have an infection which may harm your
eyesight and are worried you might go blind like your father.
O/E ☐ 	I want to have a good look at both eyes. I need to feel the eyes with your lids closed, shine
a light in both eyes to check the pupils, test how well you can focus with a chart and look
at the back of the eye. Tis will mean I need to come quite close to you, is that okay?
Empathy ☐ 	I can understand how worried you are, particularly with your father going blind.
InCludE ☐ 	You wondered if this was an infection, but I don’t think it is.
Impression ☐ 	My impression is that there may be a build-up of fuid pressure in the eye, which we call
glaucoma.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of glaucoma or know anyone who has it?
Explanation ☐ In glaucoma, the eye fuid can’t circulate as it should and pressure tends to build up, giving
you pain and sickness. Lef untreated it can be very serious. It’s not an infection but it is
possible that the decongestant tablets may have contributed to bringing this on. Being long-
sighted and from SE Asia are also risk factors. Being in the near darkness of the cinema
may have been the fnal trigger.
Options ☐ 	It is really important that we get you to the hospital to be seen by a specialist eye doctor
as soon as possible. I will phone the emergency eye clinic now to arrange this. Have you
got someone who can drive you to the hospital? Whilst you are waiting, you may be more
comfortable lying fat on your back on my couch, face up with no pillow. Would you like
some painkillers and something to take away the sickly feeling?
Empower ☐ 	I am going to print of a PIL about glaucoma so that you understand what has happened
and what to expect.
Future ☐ 	I think the doctors at the hospital will give you some eye drops and medicines to reduce
the pressure in your eye so that you are more comfortable. It is likely that they will suggest
a small operation on your eye with a laser to make a wider passage for the fuids in your
eye to move around.
Safety net ☐ 	If for any reason you are not seen at the hospital, please let me know and I will sort this out.
Please call or see me next week to tell me what is happening.
➠ 154
Eyes and Vision – 3

-- 169 of 575 --

➠ 155	
Patient’s Story 	Acute Glaucoma
Doctor’s notes Abida Khan, 70 years. PMH: routine elderly person review with PN 4 weeks ago – BP
140/90. Recent GP consultation: viral URTI. Advised OTC preparations. Medications:
none.
How to act 	Very worried. In discomfort. Annoyed (you think you should have had antibiotics recently
and that you are ill now because you weren’t prescribed them).
PC 	‘I was watching the new James Bond flm at the cinema last night when I started to feel sick
and my lef eye became sore. It’s no better today.’
History 	You were out at the cinema last night with family for a birthday celebration when you
noticed your lef eye starting to ache. You were all right when you set out from home but
your sight became blurred and there were haloes around the street lights when you went
home. You have had a few similar but very mild episodes, but they passed quickly. Tings
are no better today – you feel sickly and unwell. You have recently had a cold that was
troublesome. You came to the doctor for antibiotics but were told you did not need them
and that you should go to the chemist. Tis annoyed you because you are entitled to free
prescriptions. Nevertheless, you went to the supermarket and bought some decongestant
tablets (Sudafed Blocked Nose).
You have always been long-sighted and wear glasses. You remember that your father had
very poor eyesight in later life (although you are not sure why) and he was blind for the
last few years. He lived with you and you had to look afer him with this disability.
You have no fever or symptoms of a lung infection. Your cold is better but you feel sick and
disorientated.
Social 	Housewife, married to an accountant. Lives with husband. Grown-up children. Never
smoked and no alcohol.
ICE 	What is happening? Why do I feel so ill? Has the cold afected my eye – an infection perhaps?
Will I go blind like my father?
Ask the doctor ‘What is happening?’
‘Have I got an eye infection because you wouldn’t prescribe antibiotics?’
‘Am I going blind like my father?’
Examination 	Right eye normal. Lef eye – pupil does not react to light. VA 6/9 right eye, 6/60 lef eye. Lef
eye red.
Eyes and Vision – 3

-- 170 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Acute Angle Closure Glaucoma
In presentations of acutely red and painful eye, suspect acute angle closure glaucoma, particularly if risk
factors present:
• 	Female, older, long-sighted and Asian heritage or Black ethnicity. (Other risk factors are DM, myopia,
steroid use, including inhaled and topical, if high dose.)
• 	History of similar problems – headache, blurred vision, nausea, eye pain, haloes around lights.
• 	Recent use of antimuscarinic (e.g. amitriptyline) or adrenergic (e.g. phenylephrine).
Symptoms 	Headache, nausea and vomiting, blurred vision and haloes.
Signs 	Eyeball feels hard to the touch. Pupil fxed and semi-dilated.
Reduced VA. Optic disc abnormal – engorged vessels (difcult for non-specialist to detect).
Management1
Medical emergency. Refer immediately to ophthalmologist for admission. If this is not immediately possible:
• 	First aid – lie patient fat (no pillows) face up – may reduce pressure.
• 	Give pain relief and antisickness drug.
• 	If available – pilocarpine 1 drop 2% in blue eyes and 1 drop 4% in brown eyes (evidence based).
• 	Acetazolamide 500 mg orally if no contraindication.
Secondary care management1 – topical and IV drugs to reduce pressure then usually laser surgery to iris.
Initial treatment is usually iridotomy – to make a hole in the iris to let aqueous humour fow through. Other
options are:
• 	Iridoplasty – helps the iris to shrink from the trabecular network.
• 	Peripheral iridectomy – to remove small section of the iris.
• 	Cataract removal – if appropriate and indicated.
• 	Ongoing use of eye drops to reduce the pressure.
Te unafected eye is treated too as it is also at risk – generally laser iridotomy.
Always ask about OTC medications and do not assume that they are benign products with few relevant
side efects. Te product bought by this patient contained phenylephrine which may well have contributed
to the sudden onset of acute glaucoma.
➠ 156
Eyes and Vision – 3

-- 171 of 575 --

➠ 157
Doctor’s Notes
Name 	Fred Scott 	81 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Medications 	Atenolol 100 mg daily
Consultations 	BP check with nurse 2 months ago – all well
Investigations 	U&E, cholesterol normal 2 months ago
Household 	Daisy Scott 	84 years 	F

-- 172 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	AMD and Cataract
Open ☐ 	Hello Mr Scott – thank you – let me just have a moment to read the note. Did the optician
explain to you their concern?
History ☐ 	Okay, now was this a routine check or had you noticed any problems with your sight? Tell
me what problems you had noticed, for example with reading or distance vision.
Risk ☐ 	Are you driving? How about at night? Have you had any near misses?
Flags ☐ 	Can I check if you smoke? Do you eat a good diet? Fruit and veg?
Sense ☐ 	I sense that you have had some concerns yourself about your sight and whether it’s safe to
drive, even before you saw the optician.
Impact ☐ 	Tell me about your home situation. How far are you from the shops? Does anyone else
drive? Any family nearby? Can you use internet grocery shopping?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned your father went blind; can you tell me about that?
ICE ☐ 	What thoughts have you had since you saw the optician? Tell me what worries you about
your sight or not driving. Was there anything you were hoping I might suggest?
SummarICE ☐ 	Afer the near miss you were worried about your sight and your optician has confrmed
your worst fears and told you not to drive, which is a real blow.
Empathy ☐ 	It must have been a shock for you being told that you had some problems. Te car is a
lifeline for you and being told not to drive is worrying.
Impression ☐ 	Te optician says you have two problems: one is that you are developing cataracts and the
other is age-related macular degeneration or AMD.
Experience ☐ 	I know your father had eye problems; have you heard about cataracts or AMD?
Explanation ☐ Cataracts are a cloudiness of the eye lens so the light can’t pass through it so well. Te other
problem means that the most sensitive and the important area of the back of the eye is
becoming worn and less sensitive, so your sight will not be as sharp as it used to be.
InCludE ☐ 	You mentioned vitamins. Eating a balanced diet is important but there is some evidence
that supplements with vitamin C and antioxidants can slow AMD.
Options ☐ 	Controlling your BP well may also help and we should recheck that in a couple of weeks.
It’s good that you don’t smoke. Surgery will cure the cataracts and I can refer you for this,
if you like. Tere is no need to wait until the cataracts are worse. It will not help the AMD
but your sight could be reassessed afer the operation and it might mean you can drive for
a while longer. Your vision may deteriorate with time but this can be quite a steady change.
Empower ☐ 	How do you feel about this? Would you like me to refer you? Would you like me to send
you a PIL about AMD? I will print it of in large print so it is easier to read. If your children
can help you with the internet, you can also listen to the leafet being read out loud.
Future ☐ 	May I book you in for a BP check in 2 weeks? We can do some blood tests to make sure
everything else is okay, e.g. your blood sugar. You shouldn’t drive for now – your insurance
would not cover you if you had an accident. Could one of your children help with shopping
for now? Could they shop on the internet for you and get groceries delivered to your home?
Safety net ☐ 	If your sight deteriorates further whilst waiting for the appointment, please call.
➠ 158
Eyes and Vision – 4

-- 173 of 575 --

➠ 159	
Patient’s Story 	AMD and Cataract
Doctor’s notes Fred Scott, 81 years. PMH: hypertension. Medication: atenolol.
How to act 	Polite, concerned about your eyesight.
PC 	‘I went to the optician this morning and she wrote a note for you – I handed it in this
morning.’
History 	You went for an eye check today and the optician told you that you are developing cataracts
and AMD. She said your sight was borderline for being able to drive and suggested you
stop. She told you to see your GP to discuss this. You had noticed that your sight seemed
a bit worse than usual and troublesome ‘haloes’ around street lights had already made you
give up night-time driving. You had a near miss last week when you did not see a car and
pulled out of a junction. You have had to stop buying a newspaper as you cannot read the
print anymore.
Social 	You are a retired teacher and live with your wife who is also retired. You live quite a way
from the shops and rely on being able to drive to do the shopping and get out and about. Te
car is your ‘lifeline’. Your wife has never driven; you have always been the family ‘chaufeur’.
Tere are no family members close by. Your father went blind in later life, when he was
about 83. You remember how he struggled and became virtually housebound before he fell
over at home, fractured his hip and died shortly aferwards. You have never smoked and
eat a balanced diet. You are a basic computer user, not internet literate.
ICE 	You are now very worried about your sight.
Understanding You have never heard of AMD and will react badly to the use of this acronym that means
nothing to you (unless described). You saw your father lose his independence once he
started to lose his sight and are worried you are going the same way. You are sure you are
still safe to drive to the shops – it’s not far and you know the way.
Ask the doctor ‘What is AMD? Is it okay to drive short distances?’
‘Am I going blind?’
‘Will an operation help?’
‘Why can’t I have an operation now?’
Optician’s note ‘… I have advised him to see you for referral to an ophthalmologist for treatment of his
AMD and cataracts. His sight is below the legal level for driving.’
Eyes and Vision – 4

-- 174 of 575 --

Learning Points 	AMD and Cataract
Cataract1
Epidemiology 	Mainly >60. Men and women equal risk.
Aetiology 	Changes in proteins that make up lens.
Symptoms 	Cloudiness. Especially night vision with haloes around lights.
Risk factors 	FH, diabetes, eye surgery or injury, uveitis, prolonged or high-dose steroids. Other risk factors:
smoking, alcohol, poor diet, sunlight, myotonic dystrophy, neurofbromatosis type 2, atopic
dermatitis (independent of possible risk factor from use of topical corticosteroids).
Treatment 	Surgery. No need to wait ‘until cataract is ripe’ anymore. Usually LA, go home same day. Lens
removed and replaced with plastic one. May still need glasses for near vision. Clarity and colour
vision should be improved.
Consider 	How the cataract afects vision and quality of life, what surgery involves including risks and
benefts, whether the patient wants surgery, if they can co-operate with eye examinations, surgery
and post-operative care.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD)2
Epidemiology 	Women > men. More common in people of Caucasian ethnicity.
Symptoms 	Afects central but not peripheral vision. Reading, facial recognition more difcult. Size or colour
of objects may appear diferent with each eye.
Risk factors 	FH, age (>50), smoking, alcohol, poor diet, sunlight, long-sightedness, hypertension, history of
CVD, lack of exercise.
Referral 	Urgently to be seen in 1 week, especially if rapid onset of symptoms. Advise patient that if there
is a delay >1 week or symptoms deteriorate whilst waiting for appointment, they should attend
Eye casualty.
Dry AMD 	Most common type, macula cells become damaged by build-up of drusen deposits. Visual loss
gradual, over many years.
Treatment: diet rich in vitamins A, C, E may help. Consider antioxidants (AREDS2 combina-
tion).* Stop smoking, modify CV risk factors.
Wet AMD 	10% people with dry AMD may develop wet AMD.3
Abnormal blood vessels develop beneath the macula and damage the cells.
Much more serious than dry AMD – vision can deteriorate in days.
Treatment: injections of antivascular endothelial growth factor. Laser treatment largely super-
seded but may be suitable for some.
Also consider – referral to low vision services, group-based rehabilitation programme, eccentric vision training,
support with depression and psychological problems.
*AREDS2 = vitamin C 500 mg, vitamin E 400 IU, lutein 10 mg, zeaxanthin 2 mg, zinc 25 mg, and copper (cupric
oxide 2 mg).
DVLA driving requirements
No need to tell DVLA if only afects one eye, providing still meet visual standards for driving. Must tell DVLA
if both eyes afected.4
Visual standards:4
• 	Vision at least 6/12 using both eyes.
• 	Adequate feld vision.
• 	Read number plate from 20 m.
When a patient has sight problems, think about how you can give them accessible patient information, e.g. auditory
leafet or print of in large type. Remember that older people may be highly internet literate or may have a basic
level of skills – don’t make assumptions, check it out.
Eyes and Vision – 4	
➠ 160

-- 175 of 575 --

➠ 161
Doctor’s Notes
Name 	Eric Johnson 	61 years 	M
PMH 	Type 2 diabetes diagnosed 10 years ago
Medications 	Metformin 500 mg TDS
Gliclazide 160 mg daily
Blood glucose testing strips
Consultations 	Annual diabetes review with practice nurse 1 month ago
Investigations 	HbA1c 59 mmol/mol. BP 150/80 (recheck booked). Foot check
normal. Diabetic eye check at hospital – mild retinopathy.
Household 	Kathleen Johnson 	61 years 	F

-- 176 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Retinal Detachment
Open ☐ 	Hello Mr Johnson. I’m very sorry to hear that. Please can you tell me more about the blurred
vision, starting from when you frst noticed it?
History ☐ 	Does the vision fuctuate or is it just as bad all the time? Any pain in the eyeball? Any red-
ness? Any other eye symptoms? Has it afected your driving? Tell me about your work.
Flags ☐ 	Any foaters? Anything that appears to be like a curtain coming across your vision? Any
fashes?
ICE ☐ 	What thoughts have you had about this? What concerns you most? Tell me, did you have
any thoughts yourself about how I might be able to help you best today?
Risk ☐ 	You wear glasses – are you short-sighted or long-sighted? Do you ever wear contact lenses?
Did you have any eye problems when you were a baby? Has anyone in the family had any-
thing similar? Have you been hit in the eye recently?
Sense ☐ 	I sense this is very worrying for you and understandably so.
Impact ☐ 	Your sight is really important and you need to be able to drive safely to do your job. With
diabetes, you need to be able to see well to check your blood sugars so that you can monitor
your control. Diabetes, as you know, can afect eyesight so it is especially important to get
your blood sugars under control.
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned being stressed; please tell me a bit about that. What is stressing you?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, for the last couple of weeks the sight in your right eye has got worse – it is
now blurred and you had a near miss in your car. You have had some understandable stress
at work and I hear that it feels very important to fy to the USA next week.
Empathy ☐ 	It’s very scary noticing that your vision is blurred for no apparent reason.
Impression ☐ 	I don’t think it’s likely this is caused by your diabetes but the squash ball may possibly have
had a role. Being very short-sighted is another risk factor.
InCludE ☐ 	As this is only afecting one eye and not the other, I don’t think it’s likely to be caused by
diabetes.
Explanation ☐ I think it is very likely that the membrane at the back of the eye, which we call the retina,
has come unstuck and this is why you have had these symptoms. Another possibility is
bleeding into the jelly part of your eye – this can also cause foaters.
Experience ☐ 	Tis is called a detached retina; is this something you have heard of before?
Options ☐ 	I’d like to thoroughly examine your eyes by checking your sight using a chart, checking
your felds of vision and looking at the back of the eye. Would you be able to come down
to the surgery this morning for an examination? It’s likely that afer examining you I will
recommend we get you assessed by an expert as soon as possible because this condition can
get worse if lef untreated. I would ring and speak to the on-call doctor for eye problems
at the local hospital. I would expect them to examine you and they may want to treat you
today either with laser treatment or by putting a gas or oil bubble into the eye to help hold
the retina back in place.
Future ☐ 	I’m sorry but I think it is unlikely that you will be able to fy to the USA next week as this
could prevent healing of the retinal problem and could be very risky for your eyesight. You
must not drive while your vision is a concern. Who can drive you to the surgery? Good.
Specifcs ☐ 	Important, although less urgent than your eye problem, is that your diabetes control is not
optimal and your HbA1c level at 59 is higher than it should be. Let’s also make an appoint-
ment with the diabetes nurse to help get that sorted out.
Safety net ☐ 	If for any reason you aren’t able to get to the surgery today, please phone me at the surgery
to let me know so that I can see if I can sort out an alternative.
➠ 162
Eyes and Vision – 5

-- 177 of 575 --

➠ 163	
Patient’s Story 	Retinal Detachment
Doctor’s notes Eric Johnson, 61 years. PMH: type 2 diabetes.
Medications: Metformin, gliclazide, blood glucose testing strips.
How to act 	Very concerned.
PC 	‘My vision’s gone blurred in my right eye.’
History 	You are a 61-year-old businessman with diabetes that you struggle to manage well. Over
the last couple of weeks, you have noticed a slight reduction in VA in your right eye. You
put this down to stress at work (fnancial viability of your company – selling tractors) or the
diabetes being not well controlled, but last week you realised you couldn’t see a car that was
on your right-hand side when driving and had a near miss. Tis was very scary. You have
also noticed a few fashes and foaters in your right eye over the last couple of weeks. You
have always been short-sighted and wear quite thick lenses and contact lenses for sport.
You try to keep ft by playing squash and were hit in the eye by a ball a few weeks ago. Te
eye was a bit sore for a few hours but then okay. You did not seek help at the time because
you were busy and it is always hard to get an appointment at the doctors.
Social 	Married, with grown-up children. Businessman, working long hours. Important business
meeting in the USA next week – crucial you get to this as there is potential for a big order
that could make or break the company.
ICE 	You are unsure what is causing it but wonder if it was the eye injury with the ball. You sus-
pect your diabetes may be another possibility. You think the doctor will tell you of about
your diabetes or tell you not to get so stressed (and this would annoy you). You are worried
that either your vision is deteriorating or the doctor will say you can’t fy.
Ask the doctor ‘Am I going blind?’
‘Is it the diabetes?’
‘ 	Was it the squash ball injury?’
‘If treated today, can I go to the USA next week?’
Examination 	VA lef eye – 6/9, right eye – 6/60.
Reduced visual feld – lateral vision right eye.
Fundoscopy – difcult and retina not seen clearly.
Eyes and Vision – 5

-- 178 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Retinal Detachment1
Epidemiology 	1 to 1.5/10,000 people per year.
(One or two new cases per year in a medium-sized practice of 10,000 patients.)
Risk increases with increasing age: lifetime risk = 3% at 85 years.
Average age of occurrence = 60 years.
Male = female.
Risk factors 	Short-sightedness, FH, eye trauma, previous cataract surgery, diabetes (proliferative retin-
opathy), infammatory eye problems, e.g. uveitis, scleritis, malignancy (secondary deposit
or ocular melanoma primary), congenital eye disease (glaucoma, prematurity, cataract).
Symptoms 	New onset of foaters (lines, haze, dots).
New onset fashes of light.
Sudden onset loss of vision – starts at edge of vision and progresses to centre. Often
described as a ‘curtain’.
Reduced visual acuity – blurred vision.
Contralateral eye afected in 10%.
Examination 	Visual acuity – may be reduced to ‘counting fngers’.
Management 	Of new onset foaters/fashing lights:
1. Urgent (same-day ophthalmology) – if ‘curtain’, visual feld loss, blurred vision, abnor-
mal fundoscopy.
2. Less urgent (slit lamp within 24 hours) – if no reduction in VA, no feld loss, fundoscopy
normal.
Either case: PIL produced by RCO and RNIB – ‘understanding retinal detachment’.
Hospital treatment
Tere are various ways of closing the hole and holding the retina against the eye wall. Surgeons ofen use a
gas or oil bubble, then laser or cryotherapy to ‘stick’ it in place. Te patient has to lie in a particular ‘posture’
to get the bubble in the right place. No air travel is permitted if gas has been used as the gas could expand
and cause glaucoma and/or blindness.
When a patient has a chronic illness as well as the acute presentation (diabetes in this case), think about
how the new problem will impact on their ability to manage their chronic illness. In this case, problems with
sight could make it difcult to use and read a blood sugar monitor, with implications for diabetic control,
ultimately risking further sight damage.
➠ 164
Eyes and Vision – 5

-- 179 of 575 --

➠ 165	
Extra Notes 	The Red Eye
Te primary care dilemma is to be able to confdently diferentiate mild benign conditions (e.g. conjuncti-
vitis) from those that need urgent referral.
What to ask 	When did it start?
How did it start – quickly or gradually?
What eye symptoms (blurred vision, pain, photophobia, discharge)?
One eye or both eyes?
Contact lens wearer?
Any general symptoms (headache, nausea, fever, rash)?
Possible injury, foreign body or trauma?
PMH – eyes 	Has it happened before?
Any eye operations? Any conditions associated with eye conditions, e.g. IBD, infammatory
arthritis.
Impact 	Work? Driving? Reading?
Examination 	VA, pupils, fundoscopy.
Eyes and Vision

-- 180 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	The Red Eye
Age 	Pain 	Symptoms 	Signs 	Urgent referral
Conjunctivitis 	Any 	No 	Itchy, gritty, discharge 	Redness, 	No, but refer if not
(Most are viral. 	watering 	settling/responding
Antibiotics do 	Sticky 	over 7–10 days or
not signifcantly 	discharge. VA 	if suspect herpes.
shorten bacterial 	normal 	Swab for chlamydia
conjunctivitis) 	in neonates
Subconjunctival 	Older 	No 	May start after 	Deep redness 	No, but refer if >1
haemorrhage 	people 	coughing. Sometimes
the eye aches
Usually
unilateral
VA normal
week, check BP
Episcleritis 	Any 	No 	Mild discomfort 	Defned wedge
of redness
VA normal
No, but refer if >1
week
Trauma/FB 	Any 	Yes 	Pain. Usually unilateral 	Depends on
trauma
Depends –
immediate if
penetration
Slit lamp needed
Acute glaucoma 	Older,
usually
>50
Yes 	Pain, haloes around
lights, blurred vision, feels
sick, ill, headache
Severe
redness, ↓VA,
pupil fxed,
semi-dilated
Yes – immediate
Acute anterior uveitis 	Usually
20–50
years
Yes 	Blurred vision, headache,
light sensitive
Severe
redness, ↓VA
Yes – urgent
same day
Corneal ulcer
(ulcerative keratosis)
Any 	Yes 	Photophobia, watering,
blurred vision
Stains with
fuorescein
Yes – urgent
same day
Scleritis 	>50 	Yes 	‘Boring’ eye pain +
photophobia and ↓VA.
Usually systemic disease,
e.g. gout, herpes zoster,
connective tissue
disorder
Depends.
Anterior =
deep injection.
Posterior =
minimal signs
Yes – 24–48 hours
Endophthalmitis 	Any 	Yes 	Red eye, ↓VA, recent 	Hypopyon 	Yes – immediate.
(infammation of 	surgery, IVDU, trauma, 	in anterior 	Rare condition but
ocular cavities) 	immunocompromised 	chamber,
eyelid oedema signifcant++
➠ 166
Table adapted from http://patient.info/doctor/red-eye
Eyes and Vision

-- 181 of 575 --

CHAPTER 7 OVERVIEW
Gastroenterology
➠ 167
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Gastroenterology
Learning points in this
chapter include:
1 	Abdominal Pain 	‘Abdominal pain including differential diagnoses’
‘Acute abdominal conditions: ...cholecystitis’
Differential diagnosis of
abdominal pain
2 	Dyspepsia 	‘Common and important conditions: dyspepsia,
GORD’
NICE Guideline CG184.
Gastro-oesophageal
refux disease and
dyspepsia in adults:
investigation and
management. October
2019
Gallbladder polyp
3 	Irritable Bowel
Syndrome
‘Irritable bowel disease [is a] common condition
affecting a signifcant proportion of the
population’
‘Functional disorders: irritable bowel syndrome’
‘Stool tests including faecal calprotectin’
NICE guideline CG61.
Irritable bowel syndrome
in adults: diagnosis and
management. April 2017
Faecal calprotectin
4 	Change in Bowel
Habit
‘Gastrointestinal malignancies including…
colorectal’
Colorectal cancer red
fags
NICE Guideline NG12.
Suspected cancer:
recognition and referral.
January 2021
5 	Infammatory
Bowel Disease
‘Infammatory bowel disease such as Crohn’s
disease, ulcerative colitis’
Assessing severity
Drug monitoring
Extra
Notes
Management of
Abnormal LFTs
Fatty liver

-- 182 of 575 --

CHAPTER 7 REFERENCES
Abdominal Pain
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/acute-abdomen. Aug 2019.
Dyspepsia
1. 	NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
2. 	NICE Guideline CG184. Gastro-oesophageal refux disease and dyspepsia in adults: investigation and management.
Oct 2019.
3. 	NICE CKS. Dyspepsia – unidentified cause: Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/
dyspepsia-unidentifed-cause/prescribing-information/proton-pump-inhibitors-ppis/. Oct 2018.
4. 	NHS West Midlands. West Midlands Cancer Alliance Hepatobiliary Gallbladder Polyps Management Guidelines.
Apr 2020.
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
1. 	NICE Guideline CG61. Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: diagnosis and management. Apr 2017.
2. 	Spiller R., Aziz Q, Creed F. et al. Guidelines on the irritable bowel syndrome: mechanisms and practical management.
Gut 2007; 56: 1770–98.
3. 	NICE Diagnostics Guidance DG11. Faecal calprotectin diagnostic tests for infammatory diseases of the bowel. Oct
2013.
4. 	Van Rheenen P.F., Van de Vijver E., Fidler V. Faecal calprotectin for screening of patients with suspected infamma-
tory bowel disease: diagnostic meta-analysis. BMJ 2010; 341: c3369.
Change in Bowel Habit/Colorectal Cancer
1. 	NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021
Infammatory Bowel Disease
1. 	Ford A., Moayyedi P., Hanauer S.B. Ulcerative colitis. BMJ 2013; 346: f432.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG130. Ulcerative colitis: management. May 2019.
3. 	Truelove S.C., Witts L. Cortisone in ulcerative colitis: fnal report on a therapeutic trial. BMJ 1955; 2: 1041–8.
4. 	NICE Guideline NG129. Crohn’s disease: management. May 2019.
Management of Abnormal LFTs
1. 	Collier J., Bassendine M. How to respond to abnormal liver function tests. Clin Med (Lond) 2002; 2: 406–9.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 168
Gastroenterology

-- 183 of 575 --

➠ 169
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Rosie Carpenter 	40 years 	F
PMH 	Irritable bowel syndrome
Medications 	Desogestrel
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	1 month ago renewal of repeat contraception. No problems.
Investigations 	BP 116/62
BMI 31
Household 	No household members registered

-- 184 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Abdominal Pain
Sense ☐ 	I can hear you are in a lot of pain. We do not have morphine at the surgery but as soon as we get
to the bottom of what is causing your pain we will arrange urgent treatment.
Open ☐ 	Can you describe the pain? Please take me through your symptoms from when you frst noticed
something wasn’t right. Anything else that you have noticed?
Flags ☐ 	Have you had a high temperature? Have you vomited? Did you see any blood or black when you
vomited? Any problems passing urine? What are your stools like? Have you noticed any blood
or black colour in your stools? Have you been able to keep fuids down?
Risk ☐ 	Any history of tummy ulcers or gallstones? Have you noticed any symptoms of acid going up the
gullet or pain afer meals in the past months? When was your last period? Is there any chance
you could be pregnant? Do you have a thermometer? Could you check your temperature for
me and count your pulse for 1 minute? 38.4 and 114 – thank you. Both of those are higher than
normal.
History ☐ 	What medical problems have you had in the past? Do you take any medicines? Alcohol?
Ibuprofen?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had thoughts about what could be causing this? What are you most worried it could
be? Apart from morphine, is there anything else you thought I may suggest?
Curious ☐ 	Has a doctor given you morphine in the past?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, for 24 hours you have had a pain which is severe. You have noticed stomach pains following
eating. You vomited once and have had a fever. You fear this could be similar to the problem
your father had when he died of a bleed in the stomach. I am sorry to hear that.
Tankfully, I do not believe the same is happening to you.
O/E ☐ 	I’d like to ask you to come to the surgery now so that I can examine you, recheck your tempera-
ture, breathing and heart rate, blood pressure in both arms and feel your stomach, as well as listen
to your chest and heart if I may. Although all sounds normal with urination and periods, I would
also request you provide a urine sample so we can exclude a urine infection and pregnancy.
Impression ☐ 	From what I’ve heard so far, I believe you may have a gallbladder infection. Te other possibility
is a tummy ulcer but, due to the location of your pain and your fever, I believe a gallbladder
infection is more likely.
InCludE ☐ 	I don’t think this is a rupture of your stomach or a blood vessel like your father because you
have seen no blood and you do not drink alcohol which is likely to have led to his bleed. What
are your thoughts?
Experience ☐ 	Do you know anything about gallstones?
Explanation ☐ 	Te gallbladder releases a liquid – I always compare it to Fairy Liquid – to help sort out the fat
in our food. Tis liquid can turn into stones called gallstones which can then lead to a blockage.
Tis blockage may cause intermittent pain, like the pain you have been experiencing afer food.
I think the pain you have been getting over the past few months is gallstones. Te blockage from
gallstones can also result in an infection.
Empathy ☐ 	It is extremely painful and makes you feel terribly unwell.
Recommend ☐ If I’m right, and this will be clearer when I’ve examined you, we need to get you to hospital and
I would contact the Surgical Admission team. My other thoughts are that there is the possibility
of an infection elsewhere, for example the pancreas, but I think a gallbladder infection is more
likely. What’s going through your mind?
Future ☐ 	At the hospital, I expect they will give you painkillers and antibiotics and fuids so that you will
soon start to feel better. Tey will also do blood tests and possibly an ultrasound scan to con-
frm the diagnosis. Tankfully, most cases of gallbladder infection get better quickly with this
treatment but, if the diagnosis is confrmed, and once you are more comfortable, the doctors
may talk to you about having your gallbladder removed at some point in the future.
Specifcs ☐ 	Can your husband drive you here straight away? Please don’t eat or drink anything until I have
seen you.
Safety net ☐ 	Tere is always the possibility you may become more unwell en route. If this happens your
husband would have to stop the car and call 999.
➠ 170
Gastroenterology – 1

-- 185 of 575 --

➠ 171	
Patient’s Story 	Abdominal Pain
Doctor’s notes Rosie Carpenter, 40 years. PMH: irritable bowel syndrome and BMI 31.
Medication: Desogestrel.
POP checked 1/12 ago and no problems.
How to act 	Keep putting pressure on the doctor. He/she needs to do something!
PC 	‘What’s going on? I’ve never been in this much pain. I need morphine.’
History 	Te pain started yesterday and has gradually been getting worse. 10/10 severity.
It is in your upper stomach and radiating to the back and feels sharp.
It is worse afer eating. You have had a fever.
You have no refux symptoms and your bowels are normal.
You have been sick with the pain earlier this morning. You feel nauseous and unwell.
You have been getting pain in the upper abdomen over the past few months whenever you
eat. You have not lost weight and have seen no melaena. You have no dysphagia.
You have no cardiac or respiratory symptoms.
You have no urinary symptoms. LMP was normal 2 weeks ago.
You have never had morphine but the paracetamol and ibuprofen you have taken have not
helped.
Social 	You don’t drink alcohol as your dad was an alcoholic. You don’t smoke.
You work in publishing. You are married and live with your husband. You take no drugs.
ICE 	You fear this is an ulcer and that the ulcer may burst which you presume is what happened
to your father when he died of a stomach haemorrhage. You expect the doctor to give you
pain relief straight away and you want reassurance.
Examination 	Abdomen tender RUQ, Murphy’s positive, normal bowel sounds.
No abdominal masses or organomegaly or ascites.
HR 114 bpm regular. Temperature 38.4 °C. BP 138/84 in both arms. RR 18. HS normal and
chest clear.
Your husband is at home with you and can drive you to the surgery.
Gastroenterology – 1

-- 186 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Abdominal Pain
Differential diagnosis of abdominal pain1
Acute pancreatitis 	Tender, distention, fever and tachycardic. Causes include gallstones, alcohol and raised
cholesterol.
Peptic ulcer 	Refux symptoms (belching, heartburn, nausea) ± melaena.
Acute cholangitis 	Charcot’s triad (presents in <1/3) = fever, jaundice, RUQ pain (usually mild).
Usually in older adults, e.g. secondary to a cancer obstructing the bile duct.
Cholecystitis 	Murphy’s sign (RUQ pain) or mass + fever or raised CRP/WCC ± vomiting, radiation
to back, distention. Usually from gallstones.
RFs = raised BMI/women/diabetes. Can be more severe in men.
Acute biliary colic 	RUQ pain (with radiation to scapula) secondary to gallstones.
Local tenderness but no fever.
Mesenteric ischaemia 	Possible vascular history. Sudden onset. Systemically unwell.
May appear SOB or vomit.
Appendicitis 	Initial generalised pain before localising to RLQ + peritonitic.
Bowel obstruction 	Vomiting + constipation + distended + not passing fatus. Peritonitic if perforated.
Renal colic 	Severe loin to groin pain ± haematuria (macroscopic or microscopic).
Pyelonephritis 	Urinary symptoms + loin pain + febrile + positive dipstick ± rigors.
Ectopic pregnancy 	Lower abdominal pain (may radiate to shoulder) + β-hCG positive ± systemically unwell.
Ovarian cyst torsion 	Severe pain radiating to iliac fossa or fank usually with nausea and vomiting.
Ovarian cyst rupture 	May be peritonitic or haemodynamically unstable.
PID 	Adnexal tenderness or cervical excitation + negative β-hCG ± history of STI. May be
systemically unwell.
AAA rupture 	Pain (abdominal or back) + haemodynamically unstable.
MI 	Crushing central chest pain may radiate to arm or jaw (may present as abdominal pain)
with SOB, nausea or vomiting and sweating. May be haemodynamically unstable.
Advice
β-hCG in any female (of reproductive age) despite recent LMP or contraception.
If for good reason (e.g. not had sexual intercourse for a year), history is ‘taken in good faith’.
Most of the diferential diagnoses listed require admission. Biliary colic and renal colic management will depend
on the severity of the pain and your local access to scans. If there is no haematemesis/melaena and the patient
is well, suspected peptic ulcer disease can be referred routinely (if not meeting 2WW guidelines) for endoscopy
via local protocols.
Pyelonephritis can be treated in the community if the patient is afebrile and doesn’t have signifcant pain, but
be aware of pyelonephritis complicating renal colic – this is a urological emergency! PID may be managed in the
community if the patient is systemically well. If the patient is managed at home, provide careful safety netting
advice and consider admission if there is no improvement in 48 hours.
Tis case is assessing your ability to manage a patient’s demands and make a thorough assessment. It would be
reasonable, in a face-to-face consultation and if you felt the patient was very unwell, to check their observations
frst, explaining that you will return to ask them questions about the problem once you are happy they are not in
immediate danger.
Even if you are unsure of the cause, a febrile, tachycardic patient with abdominal pain warrants urgent further
investigation.
Due to the regulation of controlled drugs, it is unusual for practices to keep morphine. If being pressured, as the
patient is focused on morphine, address this then take the full history.
➠ 172
Gastroenterology – 1

-- 187 of 575 --

➠ 173
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Daniel Hernandez 	38 years 	M
PMH 	None
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	New patient check last week with HCA.
Smoker 15/day. Alcohol 25 units/week. BP 124/75. BMI 32.
Mentioned abdominal pain, advised to see GP.
Investigations 	No investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 188 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Dyspepsia
Open ☐ 	Can you tell me more about this pain? When did you frst notice it? Is there a pattern?
History ☐ 	What brings it on? Does anything make it worse? Or better? Where do you feel the pain? Does
it go anywhere else? How have your bowels and waterworks been? Tell me a little about yourself;
where do you work? Who’s at home? A food magazine – do you eat a healthy diet, would you say?
Have you noticed any particular meals which make the pain worse? Have you noticed a cough
at night or frst thing in the morning?
Risk ☐ 	Do you smoke? How much alcohol do you drink? Is there a family history of stomach problems?
Have you been taking any painkillers, for example ibuprofen, for anything?
Flags ☐ 	Have you lost weight? Vomited blood? Passed black stools? Does it cause any other symptoms
like nausea, sweating or breathlessness? Have you had any difculty swallowing?
ICE ☐ 	You’ve had this pain a while now; have you had any thoughts what it could be? What worries
have crossed your mind? Was there anything specifc you were expecting me to do today?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you are anxious about what happened to your mum.
Curious ☐ 	Please share your mum’s experience. Are you worried?
Impact ☐ 	How has this pain afected you? Has it stopped you doing anything?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, you have been getting pain in your lower chest and upper tummy for 2 months, worse at
night and afer large meals or alcohol. You thought it could be gallstones as your mum had this
problem. You are worried about needing an operation or blood tests.
Impression ☐ 	From listening to your symptoms It sounds to me as if you might well have acid refux rather
than gallstones. Tankfully there are no worrying symptoms. But to be sure about this I would
like you to come to the surgery this morning so I can examine you: I’d like to feel your tummy to
check for any tenderness, in particular the upper part of your tummy and around your gallblad-
der area. If I am right, there might be a little tenderness in the upper tummy but none around
the gallbladder. I would also check your heart rate. I expect this to be normal but if it was raised
it would make me think again. I can see your blood pressure and BMI have been checked last
week. Would that all be okay? Is 11 a.m. today convenient? Great – I’ll see you then.
InCludE ☐ 	I know you were concerned about needing blood tests or an operation but this is unlikely.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of refux? Do you know anything about it?
Explanation ☐ 	Refux is when stomach acid comes out of the stomach and into the food pipe. Tis causes pain
as the acid irritates the food pipe. It can go up to your throat and cause soreness there too.
Empathy ☐ 	Refux is common but can be uncomfortable. I hear it has afected your enjoyment of food.
Recommend ☐ Tinking ahead – if we confrm the diagnosis of acid refux, thankfully it is treatable. A tablet
called omeprazole, which you take every morning for a month, reduces the build-up of stomach
acid. Most people don’t have any side efects. Rarely it can cause a nasty diarrhoea and if taken
long term it can afect vitamin B12 levels and bone strength, but used in the short term and from
time to time it works really well. How do you feel about trying omeprazole?
Future ☐ 	In most cases, symptoms will settle but, if not, there are other tests we can do. For example, some
people have a bacterial bug in their stomach which can cause refux. If your pain is still there
afer the treatment, I would like to test for this with a stool or breath test.
Empower ☐ 	Diet and lifestyle can cause acid refux so changing this can both treat and prevent it. Let's
consider what triggers the stomach acid. Avoiding large meals at the end of the day, reducing
alcohol and cafeine, avoiding spicy food, raising the head of your bed and losing a bit of weight
can all help. What are your thoughts? I recommend stopping smoking altogether. Would you
like to see our nurse for support and help with this?
Specifcs ☐ 	Okay I’ll see you at 11 a.m. Just to let you know that it may take 3–4 weeks of treatment before
the pain fully resolves. If it hasn’t fully gone by this time, I’d recommend you book another
telephone call with me. If it returns in future, please let me know.
Safety net ☐ 	If at any point in the future your symptoms change or are any worse, for example you start
vomiting, the pain worsens or you pass blood or black stool, see a doctor straight away.
➠ 174
Gastroenterology – 2

-- 189 of 575 --

➠ 175	
Patient’s Story 	Dyspepsia
Doctor's notes Daniel Hernandez, 38 years. PMH: new patient. BP 124/75. Smoker 15/day. Alcohol 25
units/week. BMI 32. New patient HCA consultation last week. Mentioned abdominal pains,
advised to see GP. No investigations. No household members registered.
How to act 	Relaxed but anxious if tests are mentioned.
PC 	‘Doctor, I have a pain in the stomach.’
History 	For the last 2 months you have been getting stomach pains intermittently.
Te pain can be sharp or burning and is located in your upper abdomen/lower chest.
Te pain starts in the lower chest but radiates up, sometimes to your throat.
You feel you have been belching more too with some nausea.
Te pain is worse at night afer a large meal. It tends to be worse at the weekends when you
have been out with your friends.
You have not been sick, you have normal bowel motions and no black stools. You have not
lost any weight, although you have been trying to.
You have tried Gaviscon which did help a bit. You have since been trying to avoid foods
you would normally enjoy. You have taken no other medicines.
Social 	You came to the UK from Spain 20 years ago to study at university.
You got a good job as a graduate journalist so decided to stay. You write for a food magazine
and enjoy going out for meals.
You will ofen have a few glasses of wine with your meals. When you saw the nurse she told
you that you were drinking too much, so you have tried to cut down.
You do smoke but know you should stop! You’re thinking about trying an e-cigarette.
You live alone but have some good friends and colleagues with whom you socialise.
ICE 	You are worried about gallstones. Your mother had an operation to remove her gallbladder
and you remember her getting abdominal pains when eating. She still lives in Spain so you
haven’t had chance to ask her more about her symptoms.
You have a needle phobia so worry you may need blood tests or surgery.
You expect the doctor to examine you and possibly order blood tests.
Examination 	Abdomen sof and non-tender.
Observations normal.
Gastroenterology – 2

-- 190 of 575 --

➠ 176
Learning Points 	Dyspepsia
Te decision about how to manage these conditions is based upon the presence or absence of ‘red fag’
symptoms and whether the patient has had an endoscopy before.
NICE criteria for 2WW referral for urgent direct access gastrointestinal
endoscopy1
Either – dysphagia.
Or – age ≥55 years with weight loss AND one of: upper abdominal pain or refux or dyspepsia.
NICE criteria for non-urgent direct access upper gastrointestinal endoscopy1
Either – haematemesis (if, however, it is an acute presentation or the patient is haemodynamically unstable,
then admit to hospital).
Or – age ≥55 years with either:
• 	Treatment-resistant dyspepsia.
• 	Upper abdominal pain + low haemoglobin.
• 	Raised platelet count + one of nausea or vomiting or weight loss or refux or dyspepsia or upper
abdominal pain.
• 	Nausea or vomiting + one of weight loss or refux or dyspepsia or upper abdominal pain.
If no red fags are present
Has the patient had upper GI endoscopy before?
YES – be pragmatic – if the endoscopy was recent or the symptoms have not changed since the endoscopy
you may decide to follow conservative Rx as indicated on the endoscopy.
NO – termed ‘uninvestigated dyspepsia’ give a trial of treatment.
Dyspepsia treatment2 	1st PPI for 4–8 weeks.
2nd H2 receptor antagonist (H2RA) therapy.
Lifestyle factors 	Always remember to modify lifestyle factors: cafeine, alcohol, spices.
Check drug history 	E.g. NSAID, SSRI, bisphosphonates, calcium antagonists, nitrates,
corticosteroids.
Helicobacter pylori testing NICE advise test if status unknown or uncertain.2
If dyspepsia is likely to be secondary to a reversible lifestyle factor – consider
avoidance of the precipitant and a treatment trial frst.
Either a carbon-13 urea breath test, a stool antigen test or validated laboratory
serology testing.2
If retesting, only use the breath test.2
Return of symptoms 	Consider a low-dose maintenance dose as required.2
However, continue to review PPIs. Long-term risks include bone fracture,
vitamin B12 defciency or Clostridium difcile.3
Remember PPIs must be stopped 2 weeks before H. pylori testing and
endoscopy.2
Differential diagnosis 	Biliary, pancreatic and cardiac disease.
Gallbladder polyp4 	Refer for cholecystectomy if >1 cm or <1 cm and symptomatic or gallstones
present or polyp increasing in size at surveillance follow-up or in any patient
with PSC.
Surveillance 	If polyp 6–9 mm – repeat USS in 6 months. If ≤5 mm repeat USS in 12 months.
See algorithm in reference 4.
Gastroenterology – 2

-- 191 of 575 --

➠ 177
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Rebecca Short 	23 years 	F
PMH 	Anxiety
Medications 	Sertraline 50 mg OD
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 192 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Open ☐ 	Can you tell me about your symptoms from the beginning? Can you describe your bowels? Do
you have any pain? Where do you feel the pain?
History ☐ 	Does anything make it better? Does anything make it worse? Do any particular foods make the
symptoms worse? Do you feel bloated? Is that persistent or intermittent? Do you have any other
symptoms such as vomiting? Tell me more about yourself.
Risk ☐ 	Do you have a family history of bowel problems? Any bowel or ovarian cancer in the family?
Do you smoke? Do you drink alcohol? Any foreign travel? Do any foods make it worse?
Flags ☐ 	Have you lost any weight? Have you passed any blood? Have you passed any black stools? Do
you need to open your bowels at night? Have you had any incontinence of stools? Tat must
have been upsetting; tell me more about what happened.
ICE ☐ 	Have you had any thoughts about what is causing them? Is there anything that has been troubling
you? Were you hoping I would do anything specifc today?
Sense ☐ 	I sense that you have been feeling stressed recently. Is there anything which is causing you stress?
How is life at home? How is life at work?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned your mother told you to come. Did she have any particular worries?
Impact ☐ 	How have these symptoms afected you at home and at work?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, you have been having a mixture of loose and hard stools and you get abdominal cramps
which improve when you open your bowels. Te symptoms tend to be worse when you are most
anxious. You haven’t lost weight, passed blood or black stools. You are worried that you may
have Crohn’s as your cousin has it, and you are concerned you may need time of work.
Impression ☐ 	It sounds to me more likely that you have irritable bowel syndrome rather than Crohn’s disease.
O/E ☐ 	To confrm this, though, I would like to see you at the surgery to feel your tummy, later this
morning if that’s convenient? I would ask you to lie on the couch so I can feel for any tenderness
in your tummy, check your pulse and temperature, then measure your BP and weight. If I am
right about IBS, I would expect to fnd that your pulse and BP are normal and that there is little
if any tenderness in your tummy. Tis would help confrm what I am thinking.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of irritable bowel? Do you know anyone with it?
Explanation ☐ 	Irritable bowel syndrome is a condition in which the bowel becomes oversensitive and can cause
pain, wind, diarrhoea or constipation, and ofen a mixture of all of these.
Empathy ☐ 	It is harmless but can be uncomfortable, embarrassing and a real nuisance.
Recommend ☐ Tinking ahead, I would recommend that it would be sensible to do some tests to rule out any
other causes of your symptoms. We can check blood tests for coeliac disease (wheat allergy),
thyroid, kidney and liver abnormalities and infammatory markers to help rule out conditions
like Crohn’s disease. How does that sound?
Empower ☐ 	If these tests are all normal, we can be fairly confdent that you have IBS. Tere are several
treatment options including medication and a special diet. Let me tell you about these so you
can have a think about what you might like to try frst. Te diet is related to avoiding the foods
which are high in FODMAPs, which are a type of carbohydrate poorly absorbed by the intes-
tines. FODMAPs can make you feel full of gas. I will print of a list of all the foods to avoid. Te
medication is called mebeverine. You take it three times a day, about 20 minutes before meals.
It helps to relax the muscles in the gut so that you don’t get painful cramps. You can buy it from
the pharmacy or I can prescribe it for you. Most people have no side efects, but a few people
may get an itchy rash that is a nuisance, but usually settles with antihistamines.
Future ☐ 	May I see you at 11.30 a.m.? We can check you over, feel your tummy, and take the blood tests.
We could talk again on the phone soon, go through the results and perhaps discuss your anxiety
further? When I see you today I'll give you information on a helpful therapy called CBT.
Specifcs ☐ 	I’ve booked your appointment for today but please can you book a follow-up telephone call with
me in a week – whenever is convenient for you.
Safety net ☐ 	In the future, if the symptoms get worse, you pass blood or black stools, or you have any concerns
please call the surgery. If you ever have severe stomach pain, see a doctor straight away, phoning
111 if it is out of hours.
➠ 178
Gastroenterology – 3

-- 193 of 575 --

➠ 179	
Patient’s Story 	Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Doctor’s notes Rebecca Short, 23 years. PMH: anxiety. Medication: sertraline.
How to act 	Anxious.
PC 	‘I have been having a lot of diarrhoea recently, Doctor.’
History 	You have been having intermittent loose stools for around 9 months. You get cramping
abdominal pain which is relieved by opening your bowels and an intermittent feeling of
bloating. You sometimes pass mucus. At other times you feel that you get bunged up. You
have not lost any weight; you have not passed any blood. No vomiting. No black stools. Te
symptoms do seem to be worse when you are stressed or worried. At times you have had
to rush to the toilet at work which has caused you to get in trouble for leaving your phone.
No foreign travel. No pattern with foods.
You have not needed to open your bowels in the night.
You are ashamed to say that once you were caught short and had some faecal incontinence.
Only disclose this if the doctor asks.
Social 	You work in telephone sales. You have been put under a lot of pressure recently by your
manager. You have targets to meet all the time and this has been difcult. If you don’t meet
your targets you get paid less and sometimes struggle to pay your rent. You have had some
time of recently with anxiety but went back to work when your job was threatened. You
don’t get sick pay. Te sertraline does seem to help. You live with your boyfriend. Your
parents are local. Your mum encouraged you to ‘get checked out’ as your cousin has Crohn’s
disease.
Non-smoker.
Social drinker.
ICE 	You are worried that you may have Crohn’s disease too. You worry you will need to take
time of work, which may lead to you being sacked.
Examination 	Abdomen sof, generalised mild tenderness. BMI 21. HR 88 bpm. BP 110/70. Temperature
36.8 °C.
Gastroenterology – 3

-- 194 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Diagnosis (symptoms must be present for at least 6 months)1
‘Abdominal pain or discomfort, that is either relieved by defaecation or associated with altered bowel frequency
or stool form.’1 In addition, two of the four following symptoms:
Altered stool passage (straining, urgency, incomplete evacuation).
Abdominal bloating, distension, tension or hardness.
Passage of mucus.
Symptoms made worse by eating.
Extra features which make IBS more likely:1,2 ‘Lethargy, nausea, backache and bladder symptoms.’1
Red fags
• 	Any signs or symptoms in line with the NICE guidance on recognition and referral for suspected cancer. For
example: change in bowel habit, rectal or abdominal mass, unintentional or unexplained weight loss, or PR
bleeding.
• 	Fever.2
• 	Diarrhoea waking the patient from sleep.2
• 	Infammatory markers for infammatory bowel disease.1
Refer to NICE guidance Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
Social history
Travel, mood, stress, diet and alcohol.
Investigations to rule out other causes
FBC (suspicious if raised platelet count or anaemia), ESR and CRP (IBD), coeliac screen.
NICE state NO need to do: USS, sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, barium enema, TSH, faecal ova/parasites, FOB,
hydrogen breath tests for people who meet the IBS diagnostic criteria.1
Faecal calprotectin
When to test? 	Afer ruling out red fags, to diferentiate between IBS and IBD, if specialist assessment is being
considered.3
What is it? 	A protein secreted from infammatory cells in the gut.4
Differential diagnosis of IBS where the main symptom is diarrhoea (IBS-D)
‘Microscopic colitis, coeliac disease, giardiasis, lactose malabsorption, tropical sprue, small bowel bacterial over-
growth, bile salt malabsorption, colon cancer.’2
Management1
General lifestyle, physical activity, diet and symptom-targeted medication.
Dietary changes 	Regular meals, restricting cafeine, fzzy drinks and alcohol, avoid insoluble fbre and arti-
fcial sweeteners, a trial of probiotics for 4 weeks.
Low FODMAP diet 	But only if advised by health professional with dietary expertise.
Pain 	Trial of antispasmodics (e.g. mebeverine, hyoscine).
Bowels 	Laxatives but avoid lactulose. Loperamide for diarrhoea.
Others 	Relaxation/activity. Low-dose TCA, SSRIs, linaclotide (constipated patients) – See NICE
summary Irritable bowel syndrome with constipation in adults: linaclotide. Apr 2013.
Classifcation2
IBS-D (diarrhoea predominant) 	IBS-C (constipation predominant)
IBS-M (mixed) 	Alternators (switch subtype over time)
➠ 180
Gastroenterology – 3

-- 195 of 575 --

➠ 181
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Emmanuel Adebayo 	71 years 	M
PMH 	Osteoarthritis of right knee
Hypertension
GORD
Medications 	Co-codamol 30/500 PRN
Amlodipine 10 mg OD
Ramipril 5 mg OD
Lansoprazole 15 mg OD
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 196 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Change in Bowel Habit
Open ☐ 	Please take me back to the start and talk me through what you noticed and when. Anything else?
How do you feel in yourself?
Flags ☐ 	Have you lost weight? Passed any blood? Any fevers?
History ☐ 	Are your bowels currently either hard or watery? Have you had any other symptoms. Or pain?
Where do you feel the pain? How long does it last? Does anything make it worse? Or better? Have
you felt sick? Have you actually vomited? Have you had trouble with your bowels in the past? As
we’ve not met before, could I just clarify your past health problems and which medications you
take? Does anyone live with you at home? I’m sorry to hear that. Do you have any other family
or friends around you?
Risk ☐ 	Do you have a family history of bowel problems? Do you smoke? Or drink? Have you travelled
abroad recently? Have you taken any antibiotics?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had any thoughts about what could be causing these symptoms? Have you been wor-
rying about anything in particular? You’ve mentioned that you would like some laxatives; was
there anything else that you were hoping for today?
Impact ☐ 	What is it like living with this problem?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, you have had erratic bowel movements for 8 weeks and with some blood and lost a little
weight. You thought you may have constipation and piles and would like some laxatives.
O/E ☐ 	May I see you today at 11:30 a.m. to examine you? I would check your weight and then ask you
to undress behind a curtain and then lie on the couch. It would be really helpful if I could feel
and listen to your tummy and also examine inside your bottom. Tis would involve putting one
fnger into your bottom to feel for any lumps or bumps and to check for blood. I would ask one
of our nurses to chaperone.
Impression ☐ 	Although constipation and piles may explain some of your symptoms, with weight loss and
blood in the stool it is important we fnd out what is causing this. Tere may be something more
serious going on. I think it’s really important that we consider all causes from infammation to
bowel cancer. (Pause). What is going through your mind? I'm sorry to steer you down the road
of investigations and worry but I will support you through this.
Sense ☐ 	I sense the possibility of cancer has come as a shock to you. How do you feel about this examination?
InCludE ☐ 	It is of course possible the codeine has made you constipated with intermittent overfow where
only loose motions can get around the hard stools. Bleeding can occur when you are constipated.
Another possibility is diverticular disease – which is not a cancer. Diverticulae are little pouches
in the bowel which can become infected.
Explanation ☐ 	However, neither of these possibilities explains the weight loss. Would you like me to discuss
the next steps that we should take to rule out a condition like bowel cancer? We refer patients
to the hospital urgently so they can be seen within 2 weeks. Te hospital doctor will talk to you,
examine you and ofer you a test where a thin fexible tube with a light is passed through the
back passage to look for any abnormal areas of bowel.
Empathy ☐ 	Tis must be worrying afer your wife’s experience. What is going through your mind?
Recommend ☐ My recommendation would be that I see you this morning and then, based on what you’ve told
me, refer you to see the hospital specialists urgently. I would also like to do a blood test today to
check your blood count, and kidney and liver function, which will help us and the specialist at
the hospital.
Future ☐ 	Afer this morning’s appointment you will be seen by the specialist within 2 weeks.
Your bowel motions are formed and normal consistency today but if they become watery, we
may need a stool sample to check for infection. I’ll give you a pot in case this happens. Also,
lansoprazole can sometimes afect the bowels – could you manage without it?
Safety net ☐ 	Should you feel unwell before you are seen at the hospital, develop severe tummy pain, vomit or
pass a lot of blood, please let a doctor know straght away and if the surgery is closed this means
calling 111.
Specifcs ☐ 	Could you please ask reception for an appointment with me in 2–3 weeks afer your appointment
with the hospital so that we can discuss what has happened and what is planned?
➠ 182
Gastroenterology – 4

-- 197 of 575 --

➠ 183	
Patient’s Story 	Change in Bowel Habit
Doctor’s notes Emmanuel Adebayo, 71 years. PMH: OA, HTN, GORD. Medications: co-codamol 30/500,
amlodipine 10 mg OD, ramipril 5 mg OD, lansoprazole 15 mg OD.
How to act 	Relaxed.
PC 	‘Good morning Doctor. I was wondering if you could prescribe me some laxatives?’
History 	You have been taking co-codamol on and of for a few years for knee pain; recently your
bowels have been playing up. For the last 8 weeks or so you have noticed your bowels have
been erratic. Some days you have been rushing to the toilet with diarrhoea and other days
you have had sluggish bowels. You have been getting abdominal pain on the lef side too.
You have read the drug leafet with co-codamol and wonder if you could be constipated.
You have lost your appetite and your trousers have become looser. You aren’t sure how
much weight you have lost. A couple of times you have noticed a bit of dark blood mixed
into your stools but wondered whether this was just due to piles, which you had a long time
ago. You feel generally okay, slightly lacking in energy. You have had no fevers. Te bowel
motion this morning was formed.
Social 	You originally moved to the UK from Nigeria in the 1970s. You were an engineer and look-
ing for better job prospects. You are retired now and live alone as your wife passed away
3 years ago from breast cancer. You have some good neighbours who take you shopping
because you struggle to get about with the knee pain. You have a son who works in London
so you don’t get to see him much. You don’t smoke, but do drink a couple of whisky and
waters in the evening. You don’t know of any family history of health problems.
ICE 	You don’t have any particular concerns, but you would like your symptoms sorted out. Te
pain is sometimes bad and opening your bowels at night is a nuisance. If the doctor men-
tions bowel cancer, seem surprised. Tis wasn’t what you were expecting but, if the doctor
ofers urgent referral, then accept this.
Examination 	Normal abdominal and rectal examination. BMI 24.
Gastroenterology – 4

-- 198 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Colorectal Cancer
Refer via 2WW colorectal cancer pathway1
• 	Aged ≥40 years with unexplained weight loss and abdominal pain.
• 	Aged ≥50 years with unexplained rectal bleeding.
• 	Aged ≥60 years with either: iron-defciency anaemia or a change in bowel habit.
• 	Tests show occult blood in their faeces.
Consider cancer pathway referral
• 	Rectal or abdominal mass.
• 	Anal mass or ulceration.
• 	<50 years and rectal bleeding with any of the following unexplained symptoms or fndings:
• 	Abdominal pain
• 	A change in bowel habit
• 	Weight loss
• 	Iron-defciency anaemia
Offer FIT to people who have unexplained symptoms but who do not
meet the criteria for a suspected cancer referral, specifcally without rectal
bleeding and:
≥50 with unexplained: abdominal pain or weight loss
Or
<60 with changes in bowel habit OR iron-defciency anaemia
Or
≥60 and have anaemia even in the absence of iron defciency.
Tis case challenges you to discuss a cancer pathway referral sensitively with a patient who was not expecting
a potentially serious diagnosis. It also checks your ability to look for serious pathology even if the presenting
complaint seems minor or the patient minimises their symptoms. By taking a thorough symptom history and
checking for risk factors and red fags you should be able to spot these cases. Use pauses and give the patient
opportunities to ask questions before continuing, to ensure you are going at the right pace for that patient.
Many clinicians use the word ‘camera’ when describing an endoscope. Be clear this is a thin tube with a light.
➠ 184
Gastroenterology – 4

-- 199 of 575 --

➠ 185
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Anthony Carlisle 	26 years 	M
PMH 	Ulcerative colitis
Medications 	Mesalazine SR 500 mg capsules – 2 g OD
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No investigations in the past year
Household 	No household members registered
Letter from Gastroenterology Consultant 6 months ago:
RE: Anthony Carlisle
1 Woodland Avenue, Warwickshire
NHS No: 1234567890
Diagnosis: ulcerative colitis (in remission). Diagnosed 3 years ago.
I have reviewed Mr Carlisle in clinic today. I was pleased to fnd that his ulcera-
tive colitis is well controlled on a maintenance dose of Pentasa. He has sufered
very little abdominal pain and diarrhoea and has not had PR bleeding for several
months. His weight is stable and he has had no systemic complications. Blood
tests done before clinic were satisfactory. His full blood count and infammatory
markers were both normal. I have arranged to see him again in 12 months but
would be happy to see him sooner should he run into difculty.
Yours sincerely,
Dr S. Patel

-- 200 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Infammatory Bowel Disease
Open ☐ 	Could you tell me more about your symptoms? How do you feel in yourself?
History ☐ 	Have you had any other symptoms such as vomiting? Are you managing to eat and drink?
How well controlled is your UC do you think? Have you had many fares in the past? What
usually works? Have you needed hospital admission in the past? Have you had any change
in your vision? Any joint pains? Have you noticed any rashes?
Flags ☐ 	How ofen are you opening your bowels? Is there any blood in your stools? Do you think
that you have had a fever? Are you able to check your temperature now for me with a
thermometer? 38 degrees – thank you. And could you count your pulse for 1 minute?
110 – again, thank you. Both of those are higher than normal.
Risk ☐ 	Have you been taking your medication regularly? Has anyone else had similar symptoms?
Do you think you could have got food poisoning or a bug from anywhere? Any recent travel
abroad?
ICE ☐ 	You feel that you have a fare of UC and wish to have a prescription for mesalazine; was
there anything else you have been wondering about? Is there anything in particular that
has been worrying you?
Sense ☐ 	I sense that you are very keen to get treatment from the surgery; are you concerned that
you may need to go to hospital?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, you have been feeling unwell for 3 days and have bloody diarrhoea. You have been
opening your bowels around seven times a day. You are known to have ulcerative colitis
and, in the past, enemas have helped settle your symptoms. You need to get better quickly
as you have a wedding to go to at the weekend but you don’t want to go to hospital as you
are looking afer the family dog whilst your parents are away.
Impression ☐ 	I agree with you that this is probably a fare of UC. However, due to the number of times you
are opening your bowels, the presence of blood in your stools and your high temperature
and raised pulse rate, I feel it would be better if you are checked out in hospital. What do
you think?
Explanation ☐ Tere is a scoring system which helps us decide how severe a fare of colitis is. Your symp-
toms and examination indicate that this is a severe attack of colitis. Severe colitis usually
needs intravenous treatment which can only be done in hospital. You may need antibiotics
and fuids as well as medication to settle down the colitis.
Empathy ☐ 	It must be frustrating and worrying to become ill when you have exciting plans and a dog to
care for, but it’s likely that the fastest way to get you better is to go into hospital and follow
the specialist’s recommendations.
Recommend ☐ I would advise going into hospital. You could become seriously ill without the right
treatment.
Options ☐ 	Could you ask a neighbour, friend or your girlfriend to look afer your dog?
Specifcs ☐ 	I will phone the on-call medical team to arrange admission and give you a letter to take
with you. Do you have someone who could drive you?
Future ☐ 	Afer you have been discharged from the hospital, please arrange a call with the GP if we
need to change your prescriptions or if you have any further problems.
Safety net ☐ 	If you become more poorly on the way to hospital, stop and phone an ambulance.
➠ 186
Gastroenterology – 5

-- 201 of 575 --

➠ 187	
Patient’s Story 	Infammatory Bowel Disease
Doctor’s notes Anthony Carlisle, 26 years. PMH: ulcerative colitis. Medication: mesalazine SR 2 g daily.
Letter from consultant – all well 6 months ago.
How to act 	In discomfort, impatient for a script.
PC 	‘Doctor, I’m having a fare-up of my ulcerative colitis. Please can I have some more mesala-
zine enemas?’
History 	Tree days ago you started with some lef-sided abdominal pain and your stools became
looser. Yesterday you opened your bowels seven times and passed bloody diarrhoea. You are
feeling unwell this morning and have already opened your bowels three times. When you
have had minor fares in the past, you have responded well to topical treatment (mesalazine
liquid enemas). You have not been eating well recently and have forgotten a couple of tablets
since your mum has been away and not checking up on you. You have not been admitted
to hospital since the UC was frst diagnosed.
Social 	You live with your parents as you are saving up for a deposit to buy a house with your
girlfriend.
Your parents are away on holiday at present; you are looking afer the family dog.
You work in a restaurant as a barman. You have had to phone in sick for the last couple of
days. You are supposed to be attending a family wedding at the weekend so are really keen
to get some treatment so you can go.
ICE 	You are concerned that you will miss the wedding; you have been looking forward to going
for months. You want the doctor to give you a prescription. You are not keen on the idea
of going to hospital. You are supposed to be looking afer the family dog. If the doctor is
helpful, interested and explains their concern to you, accept admission.
Examination 	Abdomen very tender on the lef side, no peritonism. HR 110 bpm. BP 126/74. Temperature
38.0 °C. RR 16. Sats 99%.
Gastroenterology – 5

-- 202 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Infammatory Bowel Disease
Ulcerative colitis1,2
Infammation/ulceration starts in the rectum and extends proximally to diferent degrees in diferent
patients.
Incidence 	Two peaks of incidence – 15–25 years and 55–65 years.
Common symptoms 	Rectal bleeding or bloody diarrhoea, abdominal pain, frequency, urgency and
tenesmus.
Associated conditions Primary sclerosing cholangitis, autoimmune liver disease, seronegative arthritis,
ankylosing spondylitis, sacroiliitis, scleritis, episcleritis and anterior uveitis, ery-
thema nodosum and pyoderma gangrenosum.
Investigations 	FBC, U&E, LFT, ESR, CRP, stool culture, faecal calprotectin.
Referral for imaging/endoscopy and biopsy.
The severity of UC in adults
Feature 	Mild–Moderate 	Severe
Bowel movements/day 	<6 	≥6 +feature of systemic upset
Blood in stool 	Small amount or intermittent 	Yes
Pyrexia 	No 	Yes
HR >90 bpm 	No 	Yes
Anaemia 	No 	Yes
ESR (mm/hour) 	≤30 	>30
Abdominal tenderness 	No 	Yes
The table is adapted from Truelove and Witts’ Severity Index.3
Crohn’s disease4
Can afect any part of the GI tract from the mouth to the rectum, most commonly the ileum.
Incidence 	Two peaks of incidence: 16–30 years and 60–80 years.
Presenting symptoms 	Diarrhoea, blood or mucus in stools, weight loss, lethargy, abdominal pain.
Managing IBD – specialist led
For both UC and Crohn’s, most management decisions will be made in secondary care. However, see the
link below.
Monitoring and shared care protocols
Te drugs most frequently used require monitoring. Be aware that shared care protocols for these may exist
in your area. We suggest medication review dates should not be reset for more than 3–6 months and, when
you are issuing medications, recent blood test results should be checked.
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for a useful link to:
Monitoring guidance for immunomodulators
The management of UC according to the severity of the acute illness (a useful article
which includes a helpful algorithm)
➠ 188
Gastroenterology – 5

-- 203 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Management of Abnormal LFTs1
Te diseases in the table below will require referral to the liver team.
➠ 189
Disease 	Suspect when
Alcoholic liver disease 	AST > ALT, macrocytosis, low platelets, raised GGT
Chronic hepatitis B/C 	Risk factors: IVDU, blood transfusion, tattoos/
piercings especially abroad, unsafe sexual practices
or paying for sex. HBsAg positive or HCV antibody
positive. Then check HBeAg/eAb, HBV DNA, HCV
RNA
Haemochromatosis 	Raised ferritin and transferrin saturation
Low TIBC
Wilson’s disease 	Neurological signs (e.g. tremor, involuntary
movements)
Kayser–Fleischer rings caused by raised copper
Low ceruloplasmin
Autoimmune hepatitis 	Anti-smooth muscle antibodies and anti-nuclear
antibodies are present. Anaemia. Raised: bilirubin,
IgG, ESR, ALT and AST and prothrombin time
Associated with other autoimmune conditions
Primary sclerosing cholangitis 	Raised ALP, AST and bilirubin
Associated with IBD
Primary biliary cirrhosis 	Consider if high ALP, raised IgM and anti-
mitochondrial antibodies
AST/ALT may rise in the later stages
Gastroenterology

-- 204 of 575 --



-- 205 of 575 --

CHAPTER 8 OVERVIEW
Genomic Medicine
➠ 191
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum: Genomic
Medicine
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Down
Syndrome
‘Emotional, psychological and social impact of
a genetic diagnosis on a patient and his/her
family’
‘Antenatal and newborn screening
programmes (e.g. Down syndrome...)’
Notes on Down syndrome
The patient breaks bad news
2 	Cystic Fibrosis 	‘Take and consider family histories in order
to identify families with, or at risk of, genetic
conditions’
‘Principles of assessing genetic risk, including
principles of risk estimates for family members
of patients with single gene disorders’
Learning points for CF
3 	Familial
Adenomatous
Polyposis
‘Systems to follow up patients who have, or
are at risk from, a genetic condition and have
chosen to undergo regular surveillance (e.g.
endoscopy for colon cancer)’
‘Manage the day-to-day care of patients with
genetic conditions, even if the patient is under
specialist care’
Learning points – FAP
4 	Breast Cancer 	‘Identify patients and families who would
beneft from being referred to appropriate
specialist services’
‘Eligibility and referral pathways for genetic
and genomic testing’
‘Spectrum of risk-reducing measures, from
lifestyle modifcation to target treatments for
certain conditions, e.g. mastectomy and/or
oophorectomy for BRCA1/2 mutation carriers’
Notes on the genetics referral
criteria for breast cancer
5 	HOCM 	‘Assessing genetic risk’
‘Diffculties in determining the exact genomic
cause of a condition’
‘Emotional, psychological and social impact of
a genetic diagnosis on a patient and his/her
family’
Notes on HOCM
Extra
Notes
How to explain
common
genetic
conditions to
patients
Autosomal-dominant and
autosomal-recessive, X-linked
and chromosomal conditions that
are listed in the new curriculum
with two to three sentence
explanations for patients

-- 206 of 575 --

CHAPTER 8 REFERENCES
Down Syndrome
1. 	http://patient.info/health/downs-syndrome-leafet. Oct 2016.
2. 	http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/pregnancy-and-baby/pages/screening-amniocentesis-downs-syndrome.aspx
3. 	https://www.downs-syndrome.org.uk/about-downs-syndrome/pregnancy-and-baby/screening-diagnosis-
and-support/
Cystic Fibrosis
1. 	https://patient.info/doctor/cystic-fbrosis-pro. Jul 2020.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG78. Cystic fbrosis: diagnosis and management. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng78. Oct
2017.
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
1. 	https://www.macmillan.org.uk/cancer-information-and-support/worried-about-cancer/causes-and-risk-factors/
familial-adenomatous-polyposis-fap
Useful Resource
Patient information leafet: https://www.ouh.nhs.uk/patient-guide/leafets/fles/10057Pfap.pdf Useful explanation in
straightforward language for children who may be afected.
Breast Cancer
1. 	NICE Guideline CG164. Familial breast cancer: classifcation, care and managing breast cancer and related risks in
people with a family history of breast cancer. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg164. Nov 2019.
2. 	https://patient.info/doctor/familial-breast-cancer. Jul 2016.
3. 	NICE CKS. Breast cancer – managing FH. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/breast-cancer-managing-f/management/.
Dec 2018.
Useful Resource
https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/risk-and-prevention/breast-cancer-risk-factors-you-cannot-change.html
HOCM
1. 	https://patient.info/doctor/hypertrophic-cardiomyopathy-pro. Jan 2021.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 192
Genomic Medicine

-- 207 of 575 --

➠ 193
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Heather Mumford 	33 years 	F
PMH 	NVD aged 33 years
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	David Mumford 	35 years 	M
Emma Mumford 	2 weeks 	F

-- 208 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Down Syndrome
Open ☐ 	I’m so sorry to hear that. How is Emma doing? And you? What have the hospital doctors
said? How do you feel about this diagnosis? Were you given any warning?
Empathy ☐ 	It is a huge worry when a new baby needs an operation.
ICE ☐ 	When you booked the phone call, was there anything else you were hoping we would
discuss? I’ll take note of everything you wish to talk about then we’ll go through it. What
other questions do you have? What else has been going through your mind? What worries
you most? Anything else you’re wondering?
History ☐ 	I haven’t met you before and it’s the frst time we’ve spoken. Please tell me more about you.
Where is Emma now? Have you always been well? And during the pregnancy? Who are
you close to? Do you feel you are receiving much support? What do you do for a living?
Empathy ☐ 	It must be upsetting when others are not getting in touch.
Impact ☐ 	Has this news changed you or your relationship? How is your bond with Emma?
Sense ☐ 	I’m hearing from you that you have unanswered questions and lots on your mind.
Impression ☐ 	Have you had a talk with a doctor about what this means? Shall we do that today?
Curious ☐ 	What do mean when you say you feel guilty?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have bonded very well with Emma. Your immediate family are support-
ive. Your main concern is Emma’s health and you are especially worried about the heart
operation and any other medical problems Emma may develop. You feel guilty for thinking
about the impact on your own life. You have questioned how independent Emma will be
and whether she has the potential to live a long life. You would like to discuss how this has
happened and whether it is likely to happen in a future pregnancy. Have I got it? Is there
anything else you were hoping for today?
Empathy ☐ 	It is natural to hope that you will have a healthy baby. If there are any problems, it is normal
to consider how this will impact on your own life.
Experience ☐ 	What is your understanding of Down syndrome?
Explanation ☐ At conception, genetic instructions are passed from parent to child within genes and chro-
mosomes. To help understand the diference, if you imagine an instruction manual, all the
words in a book are the genes. Te genes are grouped into chapters, chromosomes. In Down
syndrome, an extra chromosome is made during the transfer of genetic instructions, so you
have not necessarily passed down a faulty gene. Tere is about a ‘10 times increased risk’1
of having a baby with Down syndrome in another pregnancy. However, overall, your risk
may still be small. Tere is a new test which is more accurate for Down syndrome which
you may think about at the time.
Future ☐ 	What do you know about an AVSD? It means there is a hole in the muscle in the heart.
Terefore, blood with and without oxygen is mixed up. Emma may also have other medical
problems such as altered vision and hearing. Tere is an increased risk of problems later in
life like diabetes.
InCLudE ☐ 	Tere may be tough times ahead and Emma may have more challenges than most. However,
Emma may live happily until a fne old age and she has a loving family on her side.
Regarding Emma’s future independence, the range of learning difculties is very variable,
but we hope Emma will fnd her own path. Ofen personalities are naturally very warm,
cheerful and gentle, and so Emma may soon win the hearts of everyone she meets.
Specifcs ☐ 	Shall we catch up again afer you have had a chance to talk to your husband and absorb
what we have talked about? Is there anything else you would like to talk about next time?
Please phone reception to book an appointment with me, a day or two afer you have seen
the consultant. I look forward to meeting Emma. She’ll be a delight I’m sure.
➠ 194
Genomic Medicine – 1

-- 209 of 575 --

➠ 195	
Patient’s Story 	Down Syndrome
Doctor’s notes Heather Mumford, 33 years. PMH: NVD 2 weeks ago. Medication: none.
How to act 	Anxious. Upset.
PC 	‘Doctor, Emma was born with Down syndrome.’
History 	You had a normal delivery 2 weeks ago following a normal pregnancy.
Emma is doing okay and she is breastfeeding nicely.
Afer testing during pregnancy, you were told your risk of a baby with Down syndrome was
low.
You and your husband, David, are currently at home with Emma. He is looking afer her
in a diferent room.
Both you and David have quickly become very fond of Emma.
You have always been well. You take no medicines.
Social 	You are an actuary. Your husband is a 35-year-old lawyer.
You have never smoked or taken drugs. You used to drink occasionally.
You have a strong relationship. You have a couple of close friends who have been very
supportive but most others have not been in touch and you have only received a couple of
baby cards. Your parents died when you were a child but David’s parents are supportive.
ICE 	You are trying to read about Down syndrome but caring for Emma takes up your time. You
are aware that in Down syndrome there are additional genes and another chromosome,
although you are a little confused between genes and chromosomes.
You are mainly concerned about Emma’s future health.
You’ve been told she has a heart condition called an AVSD and you have an appointment
with a cardiologist next week to discuss an operation. You can’t bear this thought.
You stay awake wondering if Emma will have a normal life.
If the doctor explores your thoughts, you confde in the doctor that you feel guilty when
you think about what this means for you and David. By this you mean that you always
presumed you would have successful and independent children and you took for granted
that you would have a normal family life.
You fear that only you and David will ever love Emma.
You are hoping today that the doctor can explain what Down syndrome is, why this has
happened and what this means for Emma and your family.
Questions 	Have you or your husband passed down a faulty gene?
Would a second child also have Down syndrome?
Will Emma die young? What else is Emma at risk of?
Can the doctor explain the AVSD again?
Genomic Medicine – 1

-- 210 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Down Syndrome
Genetics 	Trisomy 21 (in most cases).
Risk 	Of having a baby with Down syndrome
Aged 20 years = 1/1500. Aged 30 years = 1/800. Aged 40 years = 1/1001
Screening for Down syndrome
Stage 1
Combined test At 11–14 weeks’ gestation. Nuchal translucency (fuid collection measurement at the neck)
+ hormonal levels + mother’s age. Tis screens for Down syn-
drome, Edwards’ syndrome and Patau’s syndrome.2
Quadruple test 	Around 14–20 weeks’ gestation – only screens for Down not
for Edwards’ or Patau’s syndromes. Only done if nuchal trans-
lucency not possible.2
If more information needed, can do NIPT (to detect Down syndrome, Edwards’ syndrome, Patau’s
syndrome and Turner’s syndrome). NIPT analyses the cell-free DNA in the mother’s blood3 rather than
hormone levels.
Advertised as >98% sensitivity.
It is also therefore a screening test and women should be counselled regarding the benefts and limitations.
Stage 2
If high-risk result, i.e. if initial tests estimate a risk of >1/150, diagnostic testing will be ofered.2
Chorionic villous sampling 	Around 11–14 weeks’ gestation.2
Amniocentesis 	Around 15 weeks’ gestation.2
Other Learning Points
The start of a new relationship
What was achieved within this consultation was predominantly support at a time of need, providing a con-
fdante to share thoughts and fears. Normalising the mother’s emotions was important to ofer relief from
feelings of guilt. Tis consultation provided an introduction to a connection and relationship with the GP
which is likely to be ongoing as Emma grows.
The patient breaks bad news
A patient may walk through the door and they break their bad news, without a warning shot and ofen the
discharge letter hasn’t reached you. Have a think about what you may say when you are taken aback. Some
things will be upsetting or may even trigger emotions or feelings from your own experiences. Show your
interest and concern; however, be careful how you react and avoid judgement. Be guided by the patient.
Making connections
In this case there is a clear resonance between the mum’s experience of her own parents dying when she was
a child, and her fears about what will happen to Emma when she and her husband die. Te skilled clinician
notices these connections but chooses wisely and carefully about when (or indeed if) to share them with
the patient. Today’s consultation would have been too soon.
➠ 196
Genomic Medicine – 1

-- 211 of 575 --

➠ 197
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Olivia Wales 	29 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 212 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Cystic Fibrosis
Open ☐ 	Tell me about your niece’s experience? How is your niece? Apart from genetic testing, what
other thoughts have gone through your mind?
Impact ☐ 	How has your niece’s diagnosis impacted on your family? And you, how has it impacted
on you?
Sense ☐ 	I can hear this is very important to you.
ICE ☐ 	What do you fear the most? Do you have any other questions? You were hoping we could
arrange a genetic test for yourself – is that correct? Is there anything else that is important
to you? What would it mean to you if you did have a gene that put you at increased risk of
having a child with cystic fbrosis – how would this impact on your life?
History ☐ 	You have always been well, is that correct? Do you take any medicines? Do you work?
Curious ☐ 	Does your husband think you should have the test? Are you close to your sister? What does
she think you should do?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise what you have said so far, your sister’s daughter, Grace, has had multiple chest
infections and requires medication to help maintain her nutrition. You have watched the
amount of stress your sister has had to go through and this has made you question whether
you would like children. You are upset by the arguments you have had with your husband.
You feel the test may help you to make the choice whether to have a child.
Empathy ☐ 	It sounds as if you have watched your sister through many sad and difcult times when
Grace has been admitted to hospital. Tat must be hard.
Experience ☐ 	What is your understanding of cystic fbrosis? What do you know about what causes cystic
fbrosis?
Explanation ☐ In cystic fbrosis there is a build-up of mucus in the chest and difculty absorbing all the
nutrients from the diet because an organ next to the stomach, called the pancreas, is not
producing the chemicals needed to break food down so it can be absorbed. Unfortunately,
it can also cause fertility problems in later life.
Risk ☐ 	When a child is conceived, information from both parents is passed to the child. Tis
information is coded in genes, one from each parent. Both parents need to pass on a faulty
gene for a child to have cystic fbrosis. Everyone has a 1 in 25 chance of carrying the gene
for cystic fbrosis. Your sister must have inherited one faulty gene from your parents, which
she unfortunately passed on. You may or may not have a faulty gene. If we take the worst-
case scenario and assume that you did inherit the faulty gene too, your chance of passing
on the faulty gene would be 1 in 2. However, your child would also need to inherit a faulty
gene from your husband, who has the background risk of 1 in 25 and then a 1 in 2 chance
of passing it on. So, based on this, your risk would be 1 in 100 of having a child with cystic
fbrosis.
InCLudE ☐ 	We don’t know that you have inherited the faulty gene; if either you or your husband doesn’t
have a faulty gene, there is almost no risk of having a child with cystic fbrosis.
Options ☐ 	How would you feel about speaking to a counsellor about this?
Specifcs ☐ 	I can write to the genetics team and explain what impact this has had and we can be guided
by them. If you don’t hear from them in the next 6 weeks, please let me know. Tey may
ofer a consultation for you to discuss what options are available. Relationship counselling
is another option if you think this may be helpful.
Future ☐ 	If you decide to start trying for a family, do phone again and we can discuss this in more
detail.
➠ 198
Genomic Medicine – 2

-- 213 of 575 --

➠ 199	
Patient’s Story 	Cystic Fibrosis
Doctor’s notes Olivia Wales, 29 years. PMH: nil. Medication: none.
How to act 	Polite and quiet.
PC 	‘My husband and I would like to start a family but my niece has cystic fbrosis. I’m won-
dering if there are any special tests we could have?’
History 	You are well, take no medicines and have been happily married for 2 years. Your sister gave
birth to Grace 10 years ago and soon aferwards they were told that she has cystic fbrosis.
Your sister decided not to have another child. Tere have been no other members of the
family with this condition. Tis includes your sister’s husband’s family. Your sister’s spirit
seems to have gone over the years. Te more Grace attends hospital the more sadness your
sister has to go through. You believe the stress of the situation led to the breakdown of your
sister’s marriage. You worry that your sister will be alone if Grace dies.
Social 	You are a teacher. You drink no alcohol and have never smoked.
ICE 	You have seen your niece have lots of chest physiotherapy and she has had multiple lung
infections requiring hospital admissions. She has to take medicines to help absorb her food.
A charity is taking her to Disney World. You are aware that Grace may not live long.
What is your risk of having a baby with cystic fbrosis?
Is there a test you can have done to make sure you don’t have the faulty gene?
You don’t know if you want a child if there is a high risk of bringing a child into the world
who has to go through Grace’s experience. Your husband is desperate for children. He does
not want you to have genetic testing. He believes your chances are low and you should just
start trying. Tis has led to arguments within your relationship. You were very excited
when Grace was frst born but now, watching your sister’s life, you don’t think you ever
want children. You have not told your husband this.
It was your sister’s idea to have the genetic test.
Genomic Medicine – 2

-- 214 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Cystic Fibrosis
CF is the most common inherited disease in people of White ethnicity, caused by mutations in the CF trans-
membrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, on chromosome 7. Tis afects sodium transport across the
cell membrane and antibacterial defences.1
Risk factors 	Positive FH is the only risk factor.
Carrier frequency 	1:25
Systems affected 	Respiratory and digestive – pancreatic insufciency and biliary disease.
Presentation 	Usually recurrent LRTI with chronic sputum production. Digestive presentations less
common as only 5% pancreatic function necessary for normal digestive function.
Diagnosis2
Positive test result in people with no symptoms (e.g. infants screened with blood spot immunoreactive
trypsin test) followed by sweat and gene tests for confrmation.
Clinical manifestations, supported by sweat or gene test results for confrmation.
Clinical manifestations alone, in the rare case of people with symptoms who have normal sweat or gene
test results.
See NICE guidelines for a full list of who to assess for CF but includes the following:1
• 	FH
• 	Meconium ileus
• 	Symptoms and signs that suggest distal intestinal obstruction
• 	Faltering growth in infants and young children
• 	Recurrent and chronic pulmonary disease
• 	Acute or chronic pancreatitis
• 	Malabsorption.
Management
Patients with CF will be managed in a specialist centre by MDTs but may require GP and/or specialist
psychological support particularly at difcult times such as:1
• 	Implications for school and education 	• 	Contraception and pregnancy
• 	Transition to adult care 	• 	Becoming parents
• 	Career planning 	• 	Organ transplantation
• 	Foreign travel 	• 	End of life.
GPs can also help as follows:1
• 	Prescribe cystic fbrosis medicines:
• 	In batches of at least 1 month at a time for routine medicines.
• 	For longer periods if advised by the specialist team.
• 	Following guidance on arrangements for prescriptions of unlicensed medicines.
• 	Providing routine annual immunisation, including any alterations for people with CF.
• 	Flu vaccinations for family members and carers.
• 	Managing health problems unrelated to cystic fbrosis.
• 	Providing FIT notes as appropriate.
• 	End-of-life care, working in partnership with cystic fbrosis homecare teams.
• 	Caring for the person’s family members or carers.
➠ 200
Genomic Medicine – 2

-- 215 of 575 --

➠ 201
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Shane Dickens 	23 years 	M
PMH 	Hay fever
Hand injury aged 11 years
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No allergies
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 216 of 575 --

Example Consultation Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Open ☐ 	Tell me more about what’s led to this. I’m sorry to hear that. How is Darren now?
Impact ☐ 	How has this afected you? What have you been thinking?
ICE ☐ 	You mentioned you can’t stop thinking about this. What thoughts do you have? What do
you think about when you think of Darren?
Sense ☐ 	I can hear this has come as a shock and you are very worried.
Flags ☐ 	To help answer your questions I’d like to know more about you, please. Have you had any
symptoms – such as changes in the bowel, weight loss or bleeding?
History ☐ 	Have you had any medical problems? Do you take any medicines? How much alcohol do
you drink? Do you smoke or take drugs?
Risk ☐ 	I would like to explore your family history. Do you have any other brothers or sisters? Do
you and Darren share a mum or a dad? Is your mum well? On your mum’s side are there
any medical conditions? Is your dad well? I’m sorry to hear that. Do you know if he sufered
with the same condition? How about your dad’s family? Do you know if Darren’s mother
or family have had bowel problems or young deaths in the family?
Sense ☐ 	You sound sad. Is there anything else that keeps coming to mind? What do you fear most?
Anything else? What did you think I may say today?
Empathy ☐ 	It must be really hard being such a distance away from your brother at this time.
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned your mum is worried. What have you talked about? And Darren?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, Darren has been diagnosed with familial adenomatous polyposis. Te news
from the surgeon is not clear. You are struggling and feel sad that you have not always been
close. Your mum has questioned whether your father and grandmother had the same con-
dition. You would like to discuss this further. You have not had any symptoms and thought
I may arrange a telescope test today.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about familial adenomatous polyposis?
Impression ☐ 	Familial means it can run in families, adenomatous relates to the tissue in the gut and
polyposis means little lumps, that can turn cancerous, forming from this tissue. Tis con-
dition can occur randomly with no other family members afected, but usually parents and
grandparents have this condition. Let’s call it FAP.
Explanation ☐ We call the information which is passed from parent to child ‘genes’. Tere are genes for
every part of us. Genes come in pairs. We get one from our father and one from our mother.
Which gene is stronger determines what we are like; for example, eye colour. Each parent
also has two genes – from their mother and father. If one of their genes is faulty, there is
therefore a 1 in 2 chance they have passed a faulty gene on to you. Anyone with this faulty
gene will be afected by it. It is possible that your father and his mother had the problem
as they both died young. But we don’t know. Tis could have come from Darren’s mum’s
side. If your father did have the gene for FAP, you have a 50% chance of having it. Tis is a
serious condition and the only way to prevent death is to remove the bowel.
InCLudE ☐ 	It is difcult for me to comment on your brother’s chances without having his information
with me. If you have the test and it is negative, your risk of bowel cancer is the same as the
risk for anyone in the population. You mentioned arranging a telescope test but at this stage
we could refer you to the genetics team.
Options ☐ 	Tey may discuss having a genetic test. If we fnd you have the FAP gene, an operation will
be stressful and challenging but potentially life saving.
Future ☐ 	Do you know when you will return? I can arrange the referral today. When you return let’s
discuss how you are coping. In the meantime, look afer your health by avoiding cigarettes
and cannabis.
Empower ☐ 	Or do you wish to have time to think and talk again when you return?
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever see bleeding from the back passage, do not panic as most of the time this is
harmless. However, always see a doctor to check it out.
Genomic Medicine – 3	
➠ 202

-- 217 of 575 --

➠ 203	
Patient’s Story 	Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
Doctor’s notes Shane Dickens, 23 years. PMH: hay fever and hand injury. Medications: nil.
How to act 	Concerned. Distracted in thought at times.
PC 	‘My brother said I need a colonoscopy for familial adenomatous polyposis.’
History 	Darren is your half-brother, you share the same father. He lives in Australia.
He has now told you that he had been bleeding from his bottom and thought this was due
to haemorrhoids. He kept using haemorrhoid cream but it only got worse when he was
opening his bowels and he started to lose weight.
Te doctor sent him for a colonoscopy and it has returned as cancer. Because he was young
they did genetic tests and he has the gene for FAP.
You are healthy. You have had no symptoms. You do not take medicines.
Your bowels are normal. You have had no bleeding. Your weight is stable.
You have no other siblings. Darren’s mother’s side of the family are well.
Your mother and father were never married, and they separated two years afer having you.
Maternal side: Your mother, maternal grandparents and aunts are well.
Paternal side: Your father drank a lot of alcohol and committed suicide when he was 39.
You do not know his medical history.
You never knew your father’s mother. She died young. Your paternal grandfather has
dementia. Your father had two sisters who are well. Teir children are well.
Social 	You have been travelling and fnding work as you go in bars or in sports hire shops.
Last year you completed a Geography degree.
You have cut your travels short and you few home once you were given this news.
You plan to fy out next week to see your brother. You don’t know when you will be back
so you prefer not to arrange any hospital appointment at present.
You are not in a relationship. You smoke cigarettes and smoke occasional cannabis.
You drink alcohol socially but usually no more than 2 pints a night on average.
ICE 	You have been reading about FAP and have some questions.
You understand that you may need your bowel cut out like your brother.
You are uncertain about Darren’s prognosis as you were told ‘the surgeons are not sure that
they have got it all’.
1. You are confused by this and keep wondering if this means Darren will die.
2. ‘Mum is worried it’ll afect me too.’ She has been reading about the condition and is
wondering whether your grandmother and father had the same problem. You want to
know if this is likely to be the case. It may explain his suicide.
3. You feel anxious and are not sleeping well. You have started smoking more cannabis. If
the doctor is interested to know what has been on your mind, say, ‘I can’t stop thinking
about Darren’. If the doctor explores further, say, ‘He’s such a good guy’ and sound sad
and distracted in thought. If the doctor picks up on your cue you can say that you mean
you have never been good at communicating with your brother and feel guilty that you
did not reciprocate his interest in your life. You think about him ofen, but he does not
know this. You expect the doctor will refer you for a telescope test into the bowel.
Genomic Medicine – 3

-- 218 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
What is it?1
Rare familial condition that causes many hundreds of polyps to grown in large intestine.
Usually starts in teenage years.
Untreated, at least one polyp likely to become cancerous by age 40.
Other parts of body can be afected:
• 	Eye – congenital hypertrophic retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) – harmless black dots on retina.
• 	Bones – osteomas (harmless).
• 	Skin – sebaceous cysts.
• 	Stomach and duodenum – polyps that may become cancerous.
• 	Connective tissue – desmoid tumour.
• 	Other parts of the body – cancer.
Cause1 	Mutation in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. 1:4 people are the frst in their family
to have the gene mutation. Any children will have a 1:2 chance of inheriting it (autosomal
dominant).
Diagnosis1 	Gene testing if frst-degree relative has it. From age 12.
Screening1 	Regular colonoscopies from age 12. Gastroscopy from age 25.
Treatment1 	Usually ofered aged 16–25. Colectomy or proctocolectomy with stoma.
Genetics 	Refer for testing of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene, although some may be
sporadic.
Symptoms 	Asymptomatic, rectal bleeding or a change in bowels.
Complications Obstruction, colorectal cancer or other tumours, e.g. thyroid, carcinoid, bone.
Monitoring 	FBC, CEA, TFT, LFT, FOB, X-rays, advise dental monitoring and colonoscopy.
Also – HNPCC (hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer)
Associations 	Other cancers, e.g. ovary, prostate and stomach.
Screening 	Colonoscopy, endoscopy, cystoscopy and pelvic screening.
➠ 204
Genomic Medicine – 3

-- 219 of 575 --

➠ 205
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Nicola Bennett 	42 years 	F
PMH 	Tree normal vaginal deliveries when aged 24, 26 and 30 years.
Focal migraine 18 years.
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Duncan Bennett 	46 years 	M
Arthur Bennett 	18 years 	M
Benjamin Bennett 	16 years 	M
Elizabeth Bennett 	12 years 	F

-- 220 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Breast Cancer
Open ☐ 	What has led to this decision? Tell me more about your mother’s experience?
Curious ☐ 	When you say you have built yourself up to this…in what way?
Impact ☐ 	How has all of this impacted on your life? And on life day to day?
ICE ☐ 	What goes through your mind? Anything else? Or anything that you particularly fear? What
do your family think? How might a positive test for yourself afect your children?
Sense ☐ 	Tis has obviously played a large part in your life. It has taken courage to talk to me.
Risk ☐ 	Has a member of the family already had a worrying gene identifed? How old was your
mother when she was diagnosed? I’m going to ask about factors which can afect your risk.
I see you have had three children, the frst when you were 24. Did you breastfeed? What
contraception have you used? Did you smoke? Do you drink alcohol? Tat’s all good news.
Can you answer these questions about your mother? Do you have Jewish ancestors? Any
other cancers in the family?
Flags ☐ 	How ofen do you check your breasts? Have you noticed a lump or skin changes?
History ☐ 	Tell me about your medical history. You mentioned not being able to concentrate…tell me
more. Do you work? Is anyone else at home? How is your relationship?
O/E ☐ 	Would you like me to examine your breasts? We could book an appointment for this today?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you would like the genetic test afer watching your mother go through breast
cancer because you want to protect yourself and your children. Your sleep and concentra-
tion is afected. You have thought through potential scenarios and decided you would have
a mastectomy. You hope, however, we can reassure you and therefore your children, but
you are concerned about how a positive test may impact on them. Have I understood?
Empathy ☐ 	Tis is important to you. You’ve had frst-hand experience of the impact of cancer.
Impression ☐ 	Tere have been studies looking into when we should do genetic testing. If your mother was over
the age of 40 years, with no other cancers in the family, this is reassuring and genetic screening
is not recommended. You have also decreased your risk of breast cancer by having three chil-
dren quite young, all breastfed and you used progesterone-only contraception. Your mother’s
hormone pattern was quite diferent and, combined with smoking, she was at increased risk.
Experience ☐ 	What are your thoughts about what I have just said?
Explanation ☐ You are correct we can never be certain of anyone’s genes. We try to use the knowledge we
have to base our recommendations on. Positive tests may impact on the mental wellbeing
of families. It can be a very difcult decision.
Options ☐ 	I’d like to help you reach a decision you are comfortable with. May I suggest that we meet
again? If you still feel strongly, I can write to the genetics team.
Future ☐ 	I will email you a link to the public information NICE guidance leafet which explains
further what I have said today.
InCLudE ☐ 	I recognise that this has had a huge impact on you and made you consider many signifcant
options for your future, including a mastectomy and not having children, so I will contact
the genetics team to discuss your personal situation with them. We can then discuss what
they suggest. How does this sound?
Empower ☐ 	Whatever we decide, you will have lots on your mind. I am worried about how this is afect-
ing you day to day. Have you had ideas on how we may be able to help with that? What about
CBT? Tis is a therapy that helps you to work through how to manage powerful thoughts
to avoid them impacting on your sleep, mood or concentration. I would recommend this.
Have a think about it.
Specifcs ☐ 	We recommend that every woman checks her breasts regularly and I will also send a link
for the breast awareness leafet for you now. Let’s talk again in a month – we can book an
appointment now. When would suit you?
Safety net ☐ 	If you feel a lump or you have concerns or questions, don’t hesitate to book a face-to-face
appointment straight away.
Genomic Medicine – 4	
➠ 206

-- 221 of 575 --

➠ 207	
Patient’s Story 	Breast Cancer
Doctor’s notes Nicola Bennett, 42 years. PMH: three normal vaginal deliveries aged 24, 26 and 30 years.
Focal migraine 18 years. Medication: none.
How to act 	Determined and anxious.
PC 	‘Doctor, I would like to be referred for the genetic test for breast cancer please.’
History 	You have always feared having breast cancer and it has taken a lot of courage to contact the
GP today. ‘I’ve been building myself up to this.’ By this you mean you have had sleepless
nights with a lack of concentration at work; however, this has not yet impacted on your
ability to work efectively.
Your mother was diagnosed with breast cancer aged 45 years.
You are now aware that you are approaching this age.
Years ago, you decided that you would not worry about this until your 40s.
Tis has recently been concerning you to the extent that you have played through in your
mind all the possibilities which may occur.
Your mother had a mastectomy, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. She remained on tamox-
ifen but died 10 years later. Te cancer had returned and had spread to her bones.
Tere are no other cancers in the family. Your mother smoked and she only had you aged
37 years. She never breastfed.
Apart from three healthy children who were each breastfed for 1 year, and migraines in
your teenage years, you have been healthy. You have used the copper coil as contraception
since the birth of your third child. You used progesterone-only contraception prior to this.
You started your periods when you were 14 years old.
You are breast aware and check them every day in the shower.
Social 	You are a private physiotherapist. You are happily married and your eldest son is about to
go to university. You were at university when your mother was diagnosed for the second
time and remember feeling so far away at the time. Te risk is beginning to feel real. You
drink alcohol rarely and have never smoked.
ICE 	You expect a referral to a geneticist. You have considered in detail how you may react if the
test is positive. You would want a mastectomy. You hope you will be able to cope better with
bad news having gone through the possibilities in your mind. You fear how breast cancer
may impact on your children. You don’t want them to have to go through what you did,
watching your mother. You are hoping it will be negative so you can reassure your daughter.
You will feel guilty if the test is positive and your daughter will have to go through this. You
have been worrying that either your children or your husband are getting fed up with you
mentioning it. If the doctor declines a referral, say:
‘How can you say I am not at risk? I have the right to be referred.’
If the doctor declines, ask about a private referral. You have not read about the testing in
detail, but you read about Angelina Jolie choosing a mastectomy.
If the doctor explores the extent of how this has impacted on your wellbeing and demon-
strates an appreciation of this, you acknowledge and respect any advice. If the doctor
provides an NHS referral, you are very happy.
Examination 	You decline an examination.
Genomic Medicine – 4

-- 222 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Breast Cancer
Risk factors 	Lifestyle: alcohol and smoking. Overweight afer the menopause.
Family history: Jewish ancestors and see below.
Hormonal: early menarche.
Nulliparous or late pregnancies.
OCP or HRT.
Limited/no breastfeeding.
Breast screening 	Age extension plan = 47–73 years.
Current frst invite is before 53 years. Ten every 3 years.
Genetics: ‘A person who inherits a fault in a BRCA1, BRCA2 or TP53 gene is at high risk of developing breast
cancer…Having a faulty gene is a risk factor but does not automatically mean that you will develop breast
cancer…All women who have a faulty BRCA1, BRCA2 or TP53 gene are at high risk…Women with a high
risk have a 30% or greater chance of developing breast cancer in their lifetime.’1,2
Referral criteria for specialist assessment, familial breast cancer. NICE1
People with a family history of breast cancer but no personal history of breast cancer should be referred
from primary care to secondary care according to the following criteria:
Type of cancer in relative 	Relatives affected 	Age of relatives at diagnosis
Female breast cancer 	1 frst-degree relative 	<40
2 frst-degree relatives 	Any age
1 frst-degree and 1 second-
degree relative
Any age
3 frst-degree relatives 	Any age
Male breast cancer 	1 frst-degree relative 	Any age
Bilateral breast cancer 	1 frst-degree relative 	First primary diagnosed <50
Breast and ovarian cancer 	1 frst-degree or second-degree
relative diagnosed with breast
cancer
AND 1 frst-degree or second-
degree relative diagnosed with
ovarian cancer
ONE SHOULD BE FIRST DEGREE
Any age
‘Advice should be sought from the designated secondary care contact if any of the following are present in
the family history in addition to breast cancers in relatives not fulflling the above criteria: bilateral breast
cancer, male breast cancer, ovarian cancer, Jewish ancestry, sarcoma in a relative younger than age 45 years,
glioma or childhood adrenal cortical carcinomas, complicated patterns of multiple cancers at a young age,
paternal history of breast cancer (two or more relatives on the father’s side of the family) (2018).’3
➠ 208
Genomic Medicine – 4

-- 223 of 575 --

➠ 209
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Jason Wright 	38 years 	M
PMH 	No medical history
Medications 	No current medication
Allergies 	No allergies
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 224 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	HOCM
Open ☐ 	I’m interested to know what has led to this decision.
Empathy ☐ 	I am so sorry. I understand why you feel the need to be investigated yourself.
Impact ☐ 	Since your brother’s death how has this afected you? Do you feel diferent? Tell me about
other members of the family? How are they doing?
History ☐ 	Have you noticed any (other) symptoms? And you have no medical problems? Tell me
about you…do you work? Do you live with anyone?
Curious ☐ 	Can you confde in anyone else about how you have been feeling?
Flags ☐ 	Any pain or palpitations? And during exercise? Any fainting/collapsing episodes?
Risk ☐ 	Has any other member of the family died suddenly or had a heart condition?
Sense ☐ 	I feel this is now always on your mind.
ICE ☐ 	Have you any other fears that have been in your thoughts? You mentioned a referral to a
cardiologist. Is there anything else you were hoping I would arrange today?
SummarICE ☐ 	To clarify what we’ve discussed so far, you fear you have inherited the same condition as
your brother; you have been told this was cardiomyopathy. Since the diagnosis, you have
noticed breathlessness at times and you feel you have changed; you have started distracting
yourself with work but stopped doing sport. You fear most having to tell your family you
have the same condition and feel we need to check your general health and send you to see
a cardiologist. Have I understood you correctly?
O/E ☐ 	Would you be able to come to the surgery so that I could examine your heart, take your
blood pressure and feel your pulse? Tis would help me determine if you might have
HOCM because ofen a murmur is present.
Impression ☐ 	Whether or not the examination shows a murmur, we should investigate further.
InCludE ☐ 	From what you have told me so far, however, I don’t think that your heart has caused your
symptoms. It is very common that when we are very worried about something, we breathe
diferently and the fngers tingle. Tis is normal and doesn’t mean there is anything wrong
with you.
Experience ☐ 	What is your understanding of your brother’s condition?
Explanation ☐ HOCM is a condition that may not give symptoms but can cause SOB, collapses, chest pain
or palpitations. Te heart muscle is thickened but the vessels are not afected. We don’t
know what causes it. Tere is ofen a family link. In some cases, there is a 50% chance of
inheriting the condition. Sudden death is rare but is believed to happen due to abnormal
electrical activity causing the heartbeat rhythm to change.
Specifcs ☐ 	I will write today to the cardiology team. I imagine they will frst perform a jelly scan of the
heart, but I don’t think you will hear from them this week. Terefore, we can do an ECG,
which is a heart tracing, today. Would that be okay? I will ask the nurse to ft you in this
morning and I can also see you to examine your heart, blood pressure and pulse.
Empower ☐ 	I hope you will soon feel reassured to return to your normal activity.
Future ☐ 	We can look at the ECG result together. I also wonder if bereavement counselling may help?
Safety net ☐ 	If ever you experience palpitations, pain or symptoms during exercise, let a doctor know.
➠ 210
Genomic Medicine – 5

-- 225 of 575 --

➠ 211	
Patient’s Story 	HOCM
Doctor’s notes Jason Wright, 38 years. PMH: nil. Medications: nil
How to act 	Concerned and anxious.
PC 	‘I would like a referral to a cardiologist.’
History 	Your brother, Will, died a month ago when he was playing football.
He played at a semi-professional level and collapsed during the match and died at the
scene. Lots of people were watching; it was very distressing. Te post-mortem diagnosed
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. You have been advised to ‘get checked out’. You
are also aware that this has happened to other footballers from news reports.
Since then, you have found that you are breathless.
Your fngers tingle, usually in the evenings or in the car.
You have no medical history. No other family history. No medicines.
You are sad about your brother’s death but have no symptoms of depression.
You don’t feel that you need any help with your grief.
Social 	You are single.
You have a busy work and social lifestyle. Never smoked. Alcohol 20 units/week.
You have returned to work as a barman and you are very busy.
You have no symptoms at work.
You have been taking more on at work as a way of getting on with things.
You have stopped playing football in fear the same will happen to you.
ICE 	You were told that Will’s heart got bigger.
You then believe the vessel must have burst.
You believe your heart is getting bigger.
You fear having to tell your family you have the same condition.
You just want to see a cardiologist this week before it’s too late.
You would like your cholesterol and blood pressure checked also.
Examination 	Heart sounds normal. HR 70 bpm regular. BP 120/60.
Genomic Medicine – 5

-- 226 of 575 --

Learning Points 	HOCM1
Cause 	Unknown.
Genetics 	Usually autosomal-dominant genetic condition with variable penetrance and expressivity.
Physiology 	Hypertrophy of the undilated lef ventricle with diastolic impairment.
Symptoms 	If present (ofen asymptomatic): angina, dyspnoea, palpitations and syncope.
Examination 	Raised JVP, murmur, AF.
Investigations 	ECG, CXR, Echo and 24-hour tape.
Management 	Control symptoms: heart failure, angina and arrhythmias.
Consider myectomy and septal ablation.
Consider an implanted defbrillator to prevent sudden death.
Complications May cause heart failure, AF, stroke or sudden death (usually from arrhythmia).
Tere are several aspects to this case. First, dealing with the patient’s appropriate concern that he may have
HOCM. Tere is a medical need to assess and refer him for investigation but also to reassure him if he shows
no features of the illness at present. If time permits, there may be an opportunity to discuss the genetics
of HOCM (autosomal-dominant inheritance) should the patient wish to know. A patient in a simulated
surgery-based exam may directly ask you about this, so be prepared to explain patterns of inheritance in
layperson’s language or with use of diagrams. Te patient’s false belief that a vessel in his brother’s heart had
burst should also be sensitively addressed. Lastly, it is very important to acknowledge the devastating loss
of his brother and ofer support/bereavement counselling should he require it.
➠ 212
Genomic Medicine – 5

-- 227 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Genetic Conditions
➠ 213
Te new curriculum lists the following genetic conditions. We suggest you should be able to explain each
condition in 1–2 sentences as well as being able to explain the probability of each condition being passed
on to children.
Autosomal-dominant disorders
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Explanation for patients ‘Familial means it can run in families, adenoma is the tissue in the large bowel
and polyps are lumps in the bowel which can turn cancerous.’
Genetics 	Refer for testing of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene, although some
may be sporadic.
Symptoms 	Asymptomatic, rectal bleeding or a change in bowels.
Complications 	Obstruction, colorectal cancer or other tumours, e.g. thyroid, carcinoid, bone.
Monitoring 	FBC, CEA, TFT, LFT, FOB, X-rays, advise dental monitoring and colonoscopy.
Polycystic kidney
Explanation for patients ‘Poly means many, cysts are fuid-flled sacs and kidneys make urine from body
waste and water.’
Genetics 	Autosomal dominant is most common.
Features 	Asymptomatic or there may be pain or haematuria.
Complications 	Recurrent infections, stones, hypertension, renal failure and need for dialysis.
Investigations 	U&E, BP, ACR and USS and seek renal advice.
Monitoring 	USS and U&E.
Immunisations 	Pneumococcus and infuenza vaccine.
HNPCC (hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer)
Associations 	Other cancers, e.g. ovary, prostate and stomach.
Screening 	Colonoscopy, endoscopy, cystoscopy and pelvic screening.
Thrombophilias, e.g. Factor V Leyden
Explanation for patients ‘Te blood has an increased tendency to form clots so you are more likely to get a
blood clot in the large veins in the legs or the lungs – called a pulmonary embolism.’
Genetics 	Autosomal dominant BUT if homozygous (faulty gene inherited from BOTH
parents) signifcantly increased risk of blood clots.
Features 	DVT, increased risk of clot dislodging to form PE.
Complications 	Increased risk of miscarriage – consider if multiple miscarriages in 2nd or 3rd
trimester. Possible increased risk of pre-eclampsia, slow fetal growth, placental
abruption.
Investigations 	Screening test for APC (activated protein C) resistance, then genetic tests.
Genomic Medicine

-- 228 of 575 --

Others which are or can be autosomal dominant
• 	Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
• 	Gilbert’s disease
• 	Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
• 	Marfan’s syndrome
• 	Neurofbromatosis
• 	Von Willebrand’s disease
• 	Prader–Willi syndrome
• 	HOCM
Tere are more!
Autosomal-recessive disorders
Cystic fbrosis 	‘An inherited condition in which the lungs and digestive system can become
clogged with thick, sticky mucus.’
Hereditary haemochromatosis 	‘Hereditary means that it runs in families. Te body absorbs too much iron
from food that you eat, so levels build up in the body and, untreated, can
afect the liver, joints, pancreas and heart.’
Wilson’s disease 	‘Te body stores too much of an element called copper and, if not treated,
this can build up and cause problems in the body, particularly the liver, brain
and eyes.’
Sickle cell disease 	‘Te red blood cells are an unusual shape and do not live as long as healthy
red blood cells. Tey can’t carry as much oxygen and can block blood vessels
causing problems such as pain, infections and anaemia.’
Thalassaemia 	‘People with thalassaemia don’t produce enough haemoglobin, which carries
oxygen around the body in the red blood cells. Tis means they can become
short of breath and anaemic.’
X-linked recessive
Haemophilia A (factor VIII)
and Haemophilia B (factor IX) 	‘A rare condition that means the blood can’t clot normally so people tend to
bleed for longer than usual if they have a cut. It usually afects boys rather
than girls. It can’t be cured but can be treated with injections of man-made
clotting medicines when needed.’
Becker muscular dystrophy 	‘An inherited condition which afects boys rather than girls. Over time, it
causes weakness in the muscles of the legs and pelvis. It can cause problems
with walking and may also afect the heart.’
Duchenne muscular dystrophy 	‘An inherited condition which afects boys rather than girls. Over time, mus-
cles become weak. It can afect all muscles in the body including those in the
heart and lungs.’
X-linked dominant
Fragile X syndrome (FRAX) 	‘An inherited condition that afects both boys and girls, but is usually worse in
boys. It causes problems with development such as delay in learning to crawl
and walk and learning disabilities. It can also cause problems with speech.’
➠ 214
Genomic Medicine

-- 229 of 575 --

➠ 215
Chromosomal disorders
Turner’s syndrome 	‘An inherited condition that only afects girls. Girls tend to be shorter than
average and their ovaries don’t develop properly so they may not have
periods and usually can’t get pregnant without help.’
Klinefelter’s syndrome 	‘An inherited condition that only afects boys. Babies may take longer to
learn to crawl or walk, children may have trouble concentrating and teen-
agers grow taller than expected for the family. Most men with Klinefelter’s
will need help if they want to father a child.’
Down syndrome (Trisomy 21) 	‘People with Down syndrome have an extra copy of a chromosome. Tey
are likely to have some degree of learning disability and may take longer
to learn to crawl and walk. When they grow up, they may be shorter than
average height. Tey may have other problems for example with their heart,
and may get more infections.’
Edwards’ syndrome (Trisomy 18) ‘A rare but very serious condition which afects how long a baby may live
and very sadly most babies will die before or just afer being born. A few
babies will live to become children, but may have learning disabilities and
problems with their heart, chest, kidneys and digestive systems.’
Patau’s syndrome (Trisomy 13) 	‘A rare but very serious condition that severely afects the baby’s normal
development and very sadly ofen causes miscarriage, stillbirth or the baby
dies soon afer birth or in the frst year of life.’
A useful analogy to explain genetics is that of an instruction manual: the words are genes, the chapters the
chromosomes. Put all together and you have a plan to build a body and make it work.
Genomic Medicine

-- 230 of 575 --



-- 231 of 575 --

CHAPTER 9 OVERVIEW
Gynaecology and Breast
➠ 217
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Gynaecology and Breast
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Heavy Menstrual
Bleeding
‘Menstrual problems including heavy
menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhoea
(primary and secondary),
dysfunctional uterine bleeding’
NICE Guideline NG88. Heavy
menstrual bleeding: assessment and
management. May 2021
2 	Polycystic Ovary
Syndrome
‘PCOS – gynaecological aspects and
associated metabolic disorders such
as insulin resistance and obesity
and symptoms such as acne and
hirsutism’
PCOS
Metformin
3 	Post-Menopausal
Bleeding
‘Post-menopausal bleeding’ 	CA125 test
NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected
cancer: recognition and referral.
January 2021
4 	Cervical
Cancer – End of
Life. Discussion
with a Relative
‘Cervical cancer, CIN, dysplasia’ 	How to discuss end-of-life care with
relatives
5 	Gynaecomastia 	‘Gynaecomastia’
‘Breast lumps (men and women)’
Causes of gynaecomastia
Examination, investigation,
management.
Extra
Notes
Menopause and
HRT
‘Menopause – treatment options
including hormone replacement
therapy – systemic and local methods’
Different preparations (oestrogen
only/cyclical combined/continuous
combined)
HRT Risks 	‘The risks and benefts of hormone
replacement therapy’
Vascular risks
Breast cancer risk
Side effects
Stopping HRT
Endometriosis 	‘Common and important
conditions – endometriosis’
‘Diagnosis of endometriosis‘
‘Endometriosis need(s) to be
managed as long-term conditions…in
primary care’
Endometriosis
Ovarian Cysts 	‘Benign ovarian swellings including
ovarian cysts, dermoid’
‘Ovarian cancer including
adenocarcinoma and teratoma’
Oxfordshire Guidance – Management
of Ovarian Cysts

-- 232 of 575 --

CHAPTER 9 REFERENCES
Heavy Menstrual Bleeding
1. 	NICE Guideline NG88. Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management. May 2021.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
3. 	Mansour D. Safer prescribing of therapeutic norethisterone for women at risk of venous thromboembolism. J Fam
Plann Reprod Health Care 2012; 38: 148–9.
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
1. 	NICE CKS. http://cks.nice.org.uk/polycystic-ovary-syndrome#!scenariorecommendation. Sep 2018.
2. 	http://www.advancedfertility.com/progesterone-withdrawal-test.htm
Useful Resources
https://patient.info/womens-health/polycystic-ovary-syndrome-leafet
https://patient.info/sexual-health/hormone-pills-patches-and-rings/progestogen-only-contraceptive-pill-pop
Post-Menopausal Bleeding
1. 	NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
2. 	Postmenopausal Bleeding – Patient Care Pathway. https://www.oxfordshireccg.nhs.uk/professional-resources/
documents/clinical-guidelines/gynaecology/post-menopausal-bleeding-pathway.pdf
Cervical Cancer – End of Life. Discussion with a Relative
1. 	https://www.gmc-uk.org/ethical-guidance/ethical-guidance-for-doctors/confdentiality
Useful Resources
http://patient.info/doctor/cervical-screening-cervical-smear-test-pro. May 2021.
HPV and cervical cancer. Fact sheet. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs380/en/. Nov 2020.
NICE CKS. http://cks.nice.org.uk/cervical-screening#!scenario:1. Sep 2020.
https://www.mariecurie.org.uk/professionals/palliative-care-knowledge-zone/individual-needs/
talking-approaching-end-life
Gynaecomastia
1. 	Porter K. GP management of gynaecomastia. http://www.gponline.com/gp-managementgynaecomastia/cancer/
womens/article/1118276. Feb 2012.
Menopause and HRT/HRT Risks
1. 	NICE Guideline NG23. Menopause: diagnosis and management. Dec 2019.
2. 	FSRH Guideline: Contraception For Women Over 40. https://www.fsrh.org/standards-and-guidance/fsrh-
guidelines-and-statements/contraception-for-specifc-populations/aged-over-40/. Sep 2019.
3. 	https://bnf.nice.org.uk/drug/estradiol.html
4. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/menopause/management/management-of-menopause-perimenopause-
or-premature-ovarian-insufciency/ Nov 2020.
5. 	Jones M.E., Schoemaker M.J., Wright L., et al. Menopausal hormone therapy and breast cancer: what is the true size
of the increased risk? Br J Cancer 2016; 115: 607–15.
6. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/incontinence-urinary-in-women/prescribing-information/intravaginal-
oestrogen/ Oct 2019.
Endometriosis
1. 	https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/endometriosis/treatment/
2. 	NICE Guideline NG73. Endometriosis: diagnosis and management. Sep 2017.
Ovarian Cysts
1. 	RCOG Guideline. Green-Top Guideline No. 34. Ovarian Cysts in Post-Menopausal Women. Jul 2016.
2. 	RCOG Guideline. Green-Top Guideline No. 62. Management of Suspected Ovarian Masses in Premenopausal
Women. Nov 2011.
3. 	Oxford Guidance. Price N., Traill Z., Goldstein M., et al. Management of Ovarian Cysts. Joint PCT/Radiology/
Gynaecology/Gynae Oncology Guidelines. Version 4. Dec 2012.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
Gynaecology and Breast	
➠ 218

-- 233 of 575 --

➠ 219
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Jacqui Mason 	24 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered
Previous consultation 6 months ago
Attended with heavy periods.
Normal abdominal and PV examination.
Try tranexamic acid.

-- 234 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Heavy Menstrual Bleeding
Open ☐ 	Oh dear, tell me more about them. What pain do you experience?
Impact ☐ 	How do your periods afect your life?
Flags ☐ 	Do you ever bleed between periods or afer sex? Any pain during sex? Do you have pain
at other times? Have your periods changed? When was your last period? Do you use
contraception?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had thoughts as to what could be causing these heavy periods? Is there anything
else that you have been wondering? Any other worries? Is there anything particular you
were hoping for today?
History ☐ 	Tell me about your periods from when you frst started them. I’m interested to know more
about you… how is your general health? Any medical problems? Any other symptoms?
Do you take any medicines? Do they help? Who are the important people in your life? Do
you work? Any FH I should be aware of? Or of bleeding conditions?
O/E ☐ 	How do you feel about coming down for an examination? Your tummy and internally. Tis
may be helpful; I may be able to feel a fbroid, a harmless lump in the womb which can
cause heavy periods.
Sense ☐ 	I hear you feel strongly about seeing a gynaecologist.
Curious ☐ 	When did you start to think about endometriosis? Why did you think this may be endo-
metriosis? Does anyone you know sufer with this?
Empathy ☐ 	Your periods are impacting on your life – especially at work, which is difcult and embar-
rassing for you.
SummarICE ☐ 	You are concerned about endometriosis and the possible complication of infertility. Tis is
an understandable concern and you want tests to fnd the diagnosis.
Impression ☐ 	I agree, you are sufering from heavy menstrual bleeding. When there is no obvious cause
for this, we call it dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Reassuringly, you do not have additional
symptoms like pain during sex which may suggest endometriosis.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of any treatment options for heavy menstrual bleeding?
Explanation ☐ Everyone’s periods are diferent. When women feel their periods are too heavy or they afect
their life, we call this heavy menstrual bleeding. Te clots you mention are blood which has
grouped together.
InCludE ☐ 	Tere is always the possibility of endometriosis but the operation needed to diagnose
endometriosis carries its own risk.
Recommend ☐ Terefore, without the additional symptoms, I would recommend trying treatment for
heavy menstrual bleeding frst.
Options ☐ 	We could do a blood test to check for anaemia. Meanwhile we can treat the bleeding with
either a hormone treatment, the pill, which may reduce your periods, or a Mirena coil
which can be helpful to reduce heavy painful periods. We could request an ultrasound to
check for a fbroid. If we aren’t winning, and we’ll know soon, then we could think about
endometriosis.
InCludE ☐ 	I appreciate this does not relieve your concern about blockages of the tubes. However, it
is reassuring that you have regular periods and if you struggled to fall pregnant, we could
have a low threshold for referring you to gynaecology? Tis way we have tried the least
invasive route. What are your thoughts?
Empower ☐ 	Okay, I can see this is important to you. Okay.
Future ☐ 	Would you like to try a medication in the meantime? Can we arrange a blood test to check
for anaemia? Would you like me to request an USS so the result is hopefully available for
the gynaecologist?
Specifcs ☐ 	Please book the blood test at reception. I will refer you and, if you do not receive an appoint-
ment within a month, please phone and speak to our secretary.
Safety net ☐ 	If your symptoms change – a change to your pain or bleeding pattern – let a GP know.
Gynaecology and Breast – 1	
➠ 220

-- 235 of 575 --

➠ 221	
Patient’s Story 	Heavy Menstrual Bleeding
Doctor’s notes Jacqui Mason, 24 years. PMH: none. Medications: none.
How to act 	A little pushy. Intelligent.
PC 	‘It’s my periods. Tey are very heavy.’
History 	Your periods started aged 14 years. Tey became heavy and painful a year ago.
Te pulling pain starts on the morning of your period in your lower stomach.
Te pain lasts 2 days. Your period cycle is 8/30 with 5 heavy days.
You are changing a tampon every 2 hours. ‘Tere are clots!’
During a period, you have to leave meetings, which is embarrassing.
Paracetamol doesn’t help.
You saw another GP 6 months ago. You felt they didn’t take you seriously and the tablet
they gave you, tranexamic acid, didn’t help.
No IMB or PCB. You have no abnormal discharge.
Jacob is your boyfriend of 2 years. No dyspareunia.
You both had an STI check at the start of your relationship.
You have never had an STI. You have never been pregnant.
Your frst smear was normal. For contraception you use condoms.
You are otherwise well. No PMH, medicines or FH.
No one you know sufers with it. Decline an examination. ‘It will be normal.’
Social 	You are a graphic designer. You enjoy your job.
You rent your home with your boyfriend and have a good relationship.
You drink alcohol occasionally and do not smoke.
ICE 	Two weeks ago you read an article in a magazine about endometriosis.
It mentioned it causes heavy painful periods and can lead to blockages in the tubes.
You believe you have endometriosis.
You are concerned that this could make you infertile.
You are hoping to get married next year and start a family.
You do not want hormones as you want your body to be natural.
You thought the GP may suggest the pill. You want a referral to a gynaecologist.
Become angry if the doctor does not ofer a gynaecology referral.
You do not want to take medicines without knowing what is wrong.
You demand to see a gynaecologist. You do not take no for an answer.
Gynaecology and Breast – 1

-- 236 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Heavy Menstrual Bleeding
Heavy menstrual
bleeding 	Excessive menstrual blood loss which interferes with the woman’s physical, emotional,
social and/or material quality of life … so ask about impact!
Cause 	DUB if no cause is found.
Iatrogenic (e.g. IUD), psychosomatic disturbance.
Fibroids, endometrial hyperplasia, cancer, endometriosis, PID.
Hypothyroidism, blood clotting disorders.
Red fags 	IMB, PCB, pelvic pain or pressure – possible structural or histological abnormality.
Examination 	If the history suggests heavy menstrual bleeding without a signifcant underlying cause
then you may trial pharmacological treatment without examining the patient or perform-
ing any investigations unless treatment chosen is LNG-IUS. If other related symptoms,
ofer physical examination. Examine patient before any investigations or LNG-IUS
ftting.1
Investigations 	FBC for all women with HMB. TFT and coagulation screen if other symptoms/signs
present.
If PCB or IMB: view the cervix and refer for colposcopy if abnormal.
Infection (chlamydia) swab.
Imaging and
biopsy 	Ultrasound or hysteroscopy are the frst-line investigations.1
Pelvic USS if: uterus palpable abdominally, history or examination suggests pelvic mass,
examination difcult or inconclusive (e.g. due to obesity).
TV USS if: signifcant dysmenorrhoea, or bulky tender uterus suggesting adenomyosis.
Hysteroscopy if: persistent IMB or risk factors for endometrial polyps, i.e. if considering
submucosal fbroids, polyps or endometrial pathology.
2WW referral 	Consider if a 2WW referral is indicated – ensure you are up to date with all the 2WW
criteria for gynaecological cancers in the NICE guidance for Suspected Cancer.2
Routine referral 	If investigations needed to diagnose cause of HMB and for consideration of alternative
treatments including second generation endometrial ablation and hysterectomy.
Management
options 	Consider LNG-IUS if no pathology or fbroids <3 cm, not distorting cavity or suspected
or diagnosed adenomyosis.
If LNG-IUS declined or unsuitable, consider:
• 	Tranexamic acid (side efects include GI disturbance and headaches).
• 	Ibuprofen/mefenamic acid.
• 	Hormonal: IUS, COCP or cyclical norethisterone.
• 	Surgical, e.g. endometrial ablation or hysterectomy.
Norethisterone
VTE risk 	Consider medroxyprogesterone acetate as an alternative to norethisterone to delay men-
ses or in the treatment of menorrhagia in women with additional risk factors for VTE:
>35 years and smokers or overweight or personal or FH of VTE.3
➠ 222
Gynaecology and Breast – 1

-- 237 of 575 --

➠ 223
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Juliet Perkins 	27 years 	F
PMH 	Acne
Medications 	Epiduo
Allergies 	No known allergies
Consultations 	Telephone call 6 months ago to repeat Epiduo treatment for
acne.
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 238 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
Open ☐ 	Tell me more about your periods from when they frst started.
Sense ☐ 	I can hear that you are worried.
Impact ☐ 	How has this been afecting you?
History ☐ 	When did your periods change? Have you noticed anything else that you don’t think is right? I see
you have acne in your medical history – how is that now? Have you noticed any hairs on the face
or neck? Your general history – do you have any pain – generally or during intercourse? Have you
ever been pregnant? Or had an STI? Have you had normal smear tests? Are you in a relationship?
Do you live with anyone else? What work do you do? Do you smoke or drink much alcohol?
Flags ☐ 	Because you haven’t had a period I need to double check – could you be pregnant?
Risk ☐ 	Has anyone in your family had trouble with their periods or other women’s health problems?
ICE ☐ 	What has crossed your mind about what may be causing this? Is there anything else you have
been wondering? Anything that you are worried about? What did you think I may suggest? Is
there anything else you were hoping for?
Curious ☐ 	What conversations with others have you had about polycystic ovaries?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, for several years your periods have been less than monthly which has made you
question cysts in your ovaries. You came across this when your friend’s sister needed IVF and
her diagnosis of PCOS has made you worry about your own fertility.
O/E ☐ 	Do you know how tall you are and your current weight? Could you send me a photo of your skin?
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate it may be worrying not having regular periods and a concern when you have heard
that this may be linked to problems with fertility.
Impression ☐ 	I think you may be right. Polycystic ovaries are when we see cysts on your ovaries.
InCludE ☐ 	You have mentioned having a scan and I agree this would be helpful. If we see cysts on your
ovaries, it is likely that you have PCOS because you have the associated problems, e.g. acne
and infrequent periods. Tere are also some blood tests which help with the diagnosis such as
checking your testosterone level.
Impact ☐ 	I appreciate this may be concerning; what is going through your mind?
Experience ☐ 	Do you know what doctors suggest if we see cysts on your ovaries?
Explanation ☐ 	Te lining of the womb doesn’t tend to get thicker and thicker but the alteration to your hor-
mones can put you at increased risk of womb cancer in the long term.
Options ☐ 	To protect the womb, we should aim for four to fve periods a year or protect your womb with
the hormone progesterone. You have questioned whether metformin may be helpful. We should
be guided by test results. Metformin is a tablet usually used for diabetes. Te manufacturer did
not intend it to be used for PCOS which means if prescribed it is of licence, but it has been
shown to help with weight, the hair on the face and sugar levels which can creep up in PCOS. It
can also help with fertility. However, I suggest waiting until we have your test results back and
make the diagnosis.
Empower ☐ 	Because PCOS is linked with an increased risk of raised sugars and cholesterol, which in turn
can increase the risks to the health of your heart and blood vessels, keeping active, which you
already do with your sport, can protect you in the long term, as can eating a healthy diet. You
may fnd signifcant lifestyle changes alone prevent the need for metformin. Would you like
information leafets on the hormone options we can use to ensure you have fve periods a year
and we can discuss this when we meet again?
Future ☐ 	Although it sounds like PCOS, I would like to arrange blood tests to check your testosterone
and other hormone levels and make sure there is no other hormonal cause for this by checking
your thyroid function and prolactin. I would like to check your general health bloods including
your sugar and cholesterol. How does this sound? Are you happy for me to request an USS?
Specifcs ☐ 	Please book a blood test with our healthcare assistant. Shall we catch up again, afer your blood test,
on the phone? We can then talk about the hormone options and also inducing a withdrawal bleed
just before the ultrasound scan to get an accurate idea of the thickness of the lining of your womb.
Safety net ☐ 	I don’t expect you to experience any new symptoms; however, occasionally cysts can cause pain
so if you ever have stomach pain, please see a doctor.
➠ 224
Gynaecology and Breast – 2

-- 239 of 575 --

➠ 225	
Patient’s Story 	Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
Doctor’s notes Juliet Perkins, 27 years. PMH: acne. Medication: Epiduo.
How to act 	Concerned.
PC 	‘I haven’t had a period for 4 months.’
History 	Your periods started aged 13 years and have always been every 4–8 weeks until about 3
years ago when they started to range from 1 to 5 months.
Your periods are not heavy. You have no IMB, PCB or dyspareunia.
You have no abdominal pain.
You have never had an STI.
You have never been pregnant.
Normal smear 2 years ago.
You have no other medical history apart from acne. You have no family history.
Social 	You are a teacher for children with learning disabilities.
You have a female partner of 2 years.
You drink occasionally <14 units a week and have never smoked.
You enjoy running and tennis.
ICE 	You have heard that you may have polycystic ovaries.
You are concerned that 4-monthly periods are not normal.
You worry that the lining of your womb is getting thicker and thicker; is this dangerous?
Your friend’s sister, aged 33 years, has just started IVF treatment.
She mentioned that she has PCOS.
You would like a scan.
You have been reading and want to know if you can start metformin.
Height 165 cm. Weight 74 kg. BMI 27.
Examination 	Mild acne. Some long hairs below the chin.
Credit: SPL/Science Source.
Gynaecology and Breast – 2

-- 240 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
Diagnosis1 	Two out of three of:
Hyperandrogenism Either symptoms (e.g. hirsutism, acne, alopecia) or biochemical
(abnormal blood tests).
Cysts >12 in one ovary or ovarian volume >10 mL.
Decreased ovulation Oligomenorrhoea or amenorrhoea.
Other symptoms 	Weight gain or acanthosis nigricans.1
Investigations 	Testosterone, SHBG, LH, FSH, TSH, prolactin, T4, HbA1c and lipids.1
Diagnostic 	Hyperandrogenism – testosterone (increased) and SHBG (low/normal).1
Other causes 	Premature ovarian failure – increased LH and FSH. 1
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism – decreased LH and FSH. 1
Hypothyroidism – raised TSH and low T4.
Hyperprolactinaemia – however, prolactin may also be mildly elevated in PCOS.1
Complications 	Raised glucose and lipids.
USS 	For diagnosis (ovaries) or if oligo/amenorrhoea induce a withdrawal bleed (see below)
then refer for USS.
If endometrial thickness >10 mm → endometrial sampling.1
Lifestyle 	Decrease CV risk – exercise, weight loss and low GI diet.
Oligomenorrhoea 	Prevent endometrial hyperplasia by inducing a withdrawal bleed every 3 months, with
either cyclical progesterone or the COCP (unless protected by an IUS).1
For acne 	Usual acne Rx or co-cyprindiol for acne and hirsutism.
For hirsutism 	Bleach and electrolysis.
Efornithine cream but may cause skin irritation.
Review and stop if no efect, e.g. at 4 months.
For weight 	General advice and consider metformin and orlistat.
Complications 	Weight gain, CVD, infertility due to anovulation, diabetes, high cholesterol.
Endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma.1
Pregnancy plans 	GP – advice about lifestyle and weight loss.
Specialists – metformin, clomiphene, gonadotrophins or fertility Rx.1
If pregnant 	OGTT <20 weeks.1 Increased risk of HTN, pre-eclampsia and premature birth.1
Metformin 	Unlicensed for PCOS, initiated by a specialist1, can improve insulin sensitivity, help to
normalise menstrual cycle and it may help with weight loss or hirsutism.
Investigating secondary
amenorrhoea 	Consider a progesterone withdrawal test.2
➠ 226
Gynaecology and Breast – 2

-- 241 of 575 --

➠ 227
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Hilda Rowland 	53 years 	F
PMH 	Mirena coil inserted aged 48 years
Menorrhagia
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Brian Rowland 	55 years 	M

-- 242 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Post-Menopausal Bleeding
Open ☐ 	What’s led to this decision? Tell me more about the bleeding? Any pattern? And your
periods prior to this?
History ☐ 	Is your general health good? Any other medical problems? Do you take any medicines?
Tell me more about you? Are you active? Have you had any menopausal symptoms? Have
you had children?
ICE ☐ 	You mentioned the bleeding is likely due to the coil. Why do you think that? Has anything
else crossed your mind? Are you worried about anything? What did you think we may
decide today?
Flags ☐ 	It is helpful to know if you are sexually active and if there is bleeding aferwards. I always
check there is no risk of infection – any discharge? Other sexual partners? Any weight loss?
Risk ☐ 	Any family history you are aware of? When was your last smear? Have you had any abnor-
mal smears?
Sense ☐ 	You seem relaxed about this bleeding.
Impact ☐ 	How has this bleeding afected you?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you were warned the coil may cause abnormal bleeding and is usually in for
5 years, therefore this bleeding has not come as a shock but has been irritating. You don’t
want the heavy periods to return but are hoping for a trial without the coil.
O/E ☐ 	I don’t think we should remove the coil today as we don’t yet know the cause of the problem.
But may I examine you – feel your tummy, look with a speculum to see if the bleeding could
be coming from the vagina or the neck of the womb called the cervix, and feel the womb?
May I ask for a chaperone? Please go behind the curtain, undress from the waist down, get
underneath the top sheet and tell me when you are ready… You have no sign of infection,
but may I take swabs to be sure? May I check your weight and height?
Impression ☐ 	My concern is that you may have gone through the menopause. I say ‘may have’ because
we don’t know whether the absence of bleeding is due to your coil. Bleeding afer the
menopause can be common but needs investigation.
Explanation ☐ Tere are many possible reasons for the bleeding: a fbroid which is a harmless lump in the
womb; a polyp which is originally harmless but may have the potential to become a cancer;
it may be due to the coil, but the coil’s hormone usually lasts for 7 years; the bleeding may
also be coming from the cervix or vaginal walls which become more fragile as we age, but
they look fne today. I will send the swabs to also rule out infection. Te priority is ruling
out a cancer, which can cause abnormal bleeding.
Options ☐ 	We refer all women who bleed afer the menopause urgently for an USS, which is a jelly
scan to check the womb shows no sign of a cancer. What are your thoughts?
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate me mentioning the possibility of cancer may come as a shock, especially
when the bleeding at the 5-year mark has made sense from what previous doctors have
mentioned. As I say, in most cases nothing serious is found; however, I am sorry if this is
upsetting and causes worry whilst we consider the possibility.
Future ☐ 	Let’s now go through what you can expect in the next few weeks. At the USS they will
insert the probe into the vagina to look at the womb. Depending on what this shows, you
may need to see a specialist who will ofer a camera test to have a closer look and take
biopsies – little samples of the womb. If they do not remove the coil at the hospital, we can
do this aferwards. Please make a follow-up appointment with me to go through what they
have found, a few days afer the ultrasound.
Safety net ☐ 	If your bleeding becomes heavier or you have pain let a GP know please.
Specifcs ☐ 	You should be seen within 2 weeks from today. If you haven’t received an appointment
within 10 days let me know. If you have any questions just leave a message at reception and
I’ll phone you. Try not to worry – remember we are being thorough.
➠ 228
Gynaecology and Breast – 3

-- 243 of 575 --

➠ 229	
Patient’s Story 	Post-Menopausal Bleeding
Doctor’s notes Hilda Rowland, 53 years. PMH: menorrhagia. Mirena coil inserted aged 48 years.
Medications: none.
How to act 	Relaxed.
PC 	‘I wondered if we could remove my coil now.’
History 	You had the coil inserted 5 years ago for heavy bleeding.
You stopped being sexually active with your husband a few years ago.
Over the last 3 months you have started bleeding.
You have never been on HRT and take no other medication.
Your last period was 3 years ago. Your smears are up to date.
You have had no spotting until 3 months ago, with no pattern.
You have no abdominal pain.
You have not lost weight.
You had hot fushes for a couple of years but these stopped a year ago.
You have no urinary or bowel problems.
You have been irritated by having to remember to take towels with you.
Social 	A headmistress for the local primary school.
You enjoy walking and you are a well-known member of the community.
You lead a busy lifestyle with the school and church group charity events.
You have never smoked and enjoy a sherry on weekends.
ICE 	You believe your coil has started to run out which is why you would like it out.
You are not worried, as you were told you may bleed at random times and it usually lasts
for 5 years, so this makes sense to you.
You expect the doctor will want to remove it today and then it will be sorted.
Another possibility is that you could have another one. You just worry about the heavy
bleeding coming back but wonder if you could try without it frst.
If the doctor mentions that this could be cancer react to this …‘You think I have cancer?
You’ve got me worried now!’
Examination 	Te vulva, vagina and cervix look healthy. Te coil string is visible.
No palpable pelvic masses.
Abdomen sof, non-tender and no masses.
BMI 25.
Gynaecology and Breast – 3

-- 244 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Suspected Gynaecological Cancer
Always refer to the full text of NICE Guideline NG12: Suspected cancer: recognition and referral.
Cervical
When to examine the vagina and cervix with a speculum and palpate the uterus/ovaries:
• 	Every woman with abnormal or post-coital bleeding or pelvic pain.
• 	Do not rely on recent smear tests.
• 	Do not wait for the result of a smear test if there is any abnormality on the cervix. Refer 2WW.
Ovarian
When to request CA125 testing for possible ovarian cancer:
• 	Be suspicious in any woman, particularly those over 50 with symptoms of bloating, feeling full, loss of
appetite, abdominal or pelvic pain or frequency/urgency in urination with symptoms occurring more
than 12 times a month.1
• 	Consider also if ‘unexplained weight loss, fatigue or changes in bowel habit’.1
• 	Be aware IBS rarely presents in women for the frst time over the age of 50.
CA125 is ≥35 IU/mL:
• 	Urgently (within 2 weeks) ‘arrange an ultrasound scan of the abdomen and pelvis’. 1 If this suggested a
cancer the patient would then require a 2WW gynaecology referral.
CA125 is <35 IU/mL OR ≥35 IU/mL and the USS is normal:
• 	Reassess for other conditions then safety net for more frequent/persistent or new symptoms.1
Endometrial
2WW gynaecology ≥55 years with PMB.
Consider if <55 years with PMB.1
However, many GPs have direct access (2WW) to ultrasound (85% sensitivity) as a frst-line investigation
for PMB. If women also have a normal speculum examination, up-to-date smear, endometrial thickness
of <4 mm and no risk factors (BMI >35, DM, Tamoxifen or previous hyperplasia) then, if the bleeding
settles, no hysteroscopy is required.2 If, however, bleeding persists then the GP should consider referral for
a hysteroscopy which may detect a mass not seen on the ultrasound, for example an endocervical tumour.
Consider a direct access ultrasound scan for women >55 years with unexplained vaginal discharge if frst
presentation of this or have thrombocytosis or have macro/microscopic haematuria and: low Hb or high
platelets or raised blood glucose. 1
Reasons to send a 2WW gynaecology referral:
• 	Ascites and/or pelvic or abdominal mass.1
• 	If an ultrasound suggests cancer.
• 	Women with PMB – see above and your local guidelines.
• 	Consider if abnormal appearance of the cervix, vagina or vulva (e.g. lump, ulceration or bleeding).1
➠ 230
Gynaecology and Breast – 3

-- 245 of 575 --

➠ 231
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Louise Barker 	33 years 	F
PMH 	Metastatic cervical cancer diagnosed 5 months ago.
Last hospital letter – TAH followed by chemotherapy. Now
palliative care.
Normal vaginal delivery 2 years ago
Ex-smoker
Medications 	Cyclizine
Ibuprofen
Paracetamol
Codeine phosphate
Metoclopramide
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	1 week ago with GP – abdominal pain. Codeine commenced.
Investigations 	No recent tests completed at the practice.
Household 	James Barker 	35 years 	M
Megan Barker 	2 years 	F
Husband has arranged an appointment to discuss his wife.

-- 246 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Cervical Cancer – End of Life.
Discussion with a Relative
Open ☐ 	Hello Mr Barker, my name is Dr X. What would you like to talk to me about today? What
has been going through your mind?
History ☐ 	May I clarify what you understand about Louise’s health? How is Louise physically? How
is she coping emotionally? How are you coping? How is your mood at present? Who else
is at home? Do you have any other support? Are you at work? Who is involved in Louise’s
care at present?
Sense ☐ 	I can hear that you are devastated and I hear that you have lots on your mind.
ICE ☐ 	When you are on your own, what thoughts do you have? Anything else that you have been
wondering? All kinds of emotions occur at a time like this: sadness, fear, guilt, hopelessness.
I’m interested to know what you have been feeling. Is there anything else that makes you
feel anxious or worried? What would be helpful to you and your family? Is there anything
else that you need or you are hoping for?
Impact ☐ 	Do you feel responsible for Louise’s care day to day?
Curious ☐ 	When you say she will no longer be breathing… what else is going through your mind?
What are your thoughts when you think of life without her? ‘Back in time’, what do you
mean? What do you think is on Louise’s mind? Have you shared how you feel with each
other? Have you discussed going to a hospice?
Empathy ☐ 	You have many thoughts and emotions, whilst it sounds as if you are trying to be brave for
your family.
SummarICE ☐ 	You have had fears of fnding Louise no longer breathing and hope that when Louise is
very poorly she will be in a hospice. You have had feelings of guilt and you can’t imagine,
at present, life with Megan without Louise, especially when you work and your family live
5 hours away. Have I understood you correctly?
Explanation ☐ You are correct that the virus that causes this infection can be sexually transmitted, but
this virus is so common. Over a third of people your age will have this virus, which is far
higher than other STIs. Louise has been extremely unlucky. Most women with the virus
will remain healthy.
Options ☐ 	You mentioned that you would like someone to talk to, about how to talk to Megan. Would
it be okay if I spoke to the palliative care nurses? Tey could talk to you and Louise about
options for the future, the benefts of a hospice as well as how they can help within your
own home, and also about talking to Megan.
InCludE ☐ 	You mentioned you fear fnding Louise not breathing in the morning and how you will
cope without her. I also wonder if speaking to a counsellor may be helpful to talk through
your fears. How would you feel about that?
Empower ☐ 	Could you talk to any friends or family about who may be able to help you with Megan? If
we were to think about how might they help you, what comes to mind? Have you thought
about creating a memory box for Megan for when she is older? Some families fnd this
helpful.
Future ☐ 	I’m just wondering about when we should speak again. What are your thoughts? Can we
arrange for Louise and you to come into the surgery together?
Safety net ☐ 	If, in the meantime, you or Louise ever need help day or night, do you know who to call?
Specifcs ☐ 	If we are open, please contact us or Louise’s palliative care nurse. During the night you can
call 111 for a doctor. Do you have all the telephone numbers to hand?
➠ 232
Gynaecology and Breast – 4

-- 247 of 575 --

Patient’s Story 	Cervical Cancer – End of Life.
Discussion with a Relative
➠ 233
Doctor’s notes Mr Barker has arranged a telephone appointment to discuss his wife. Louise Barker,
33 years. PMH: metastatic cervical cancer diagnosed 5 months ago. Last hospital letter;
TAH followed by chemotherapy and now palliative care. NVD 2 years ago.
Medications: Cyclizine, ibuprofen, paracetamol, codeine and metoclopramide.
How to act 	Quiet and polite.
PC 	‘I just thought I should talk to you, Doctor.’
Be slow to give information.
‘Tere’s so much in my mind I can’t concentrate sometimes.’
History 	You understand your wife was diagnosed with metastatic cervical cancer 5 months ago. She
has had a TAH and the last scan showed the chemotherapy was not successful. Originally,
she had bleeding and pain for months but put this down to her POP and IBS. She missed
her smear because of the baby and then she forgot. Currently Louise is able to manage at
home on pain relief but you worry about how you will look afer her and Megan, who is
now 2 years old, as Louise’s disease progresses. Te palliative care team has not visited as
currently Louise’s symptoms are controlled. Louise is strong emotionally with family but
cries at night.
Social 	Louise’s family live locally and are around most days. Your family is 5 hours away. You are
signed of work for 3 months. You are a surveyor. You met Louise 3 years ago and within a
year you were married. Prior to life with Louise, life was centred around work and friends
but once Megan arrived, life dramatically changed. You have no medical or psychiatric
history. You do not feel depressed but incredibly sad. You eat and sleep but have many
upsetting thoughts which are distracting. You have no thoughts of harming yourself or
another.
ICE 	‘I can’t stop thinking that she won’t be breathing.’ You mean you are frightened about fnding
Louise dead. Every morning you wait until you can feel her breathe before you turn to look
at her.
‘How will I cope without her?’ By this you mean how you will care for Megan alone. You feel
full of sadness when thinking about your future life. No one has brought up the subject of
life afer Louise as they don’t want to upset you but you think it would be a relief to discuss
this and will talk to the family.
‘You know, if life could go back in time.’ You feel guilty with your thoughts. You sometimes
wish you had never met Louise, then you wouldn’t be going through this. You also believe
this is your fault. You read that the virus that leads to the cancer is sexually transmitted and
you fear this was passed on from you. Louise told you ‘not to be silly’. You cry with Louise
if ever you talk about your feelings but you don’t tell her things that you fear may upset her.
You think Louise feels guilty that she will leave you and Megan alone.
You hope the doctor will visit Louise and talk to her about a hospice so she will be around
nurses ‘when it happens’. You feel you need someone to talk to about how to talk to Megan
about her mother. You need someone to help you with Megan afer she has gone.
Gynaecology and Breast – 4

-- 248 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Cervical Cancer – End of Life.
Discussion with a Relative
Confdentiality1 Unless the patient has given consent, no information can be given to the NOK. However,
you can speak in general terms about a condition or likely outcome, e.g. ‘ofen in similar
situations the hospice can ofer support’.
You cannot give new information to the relative but can discuss what they already know.
Again be general to avoid any confdentiality issues, e.g. in this case you can discuss cervical
cancer in general (such as links to HPV) but not the specifcs of Louise’s case.
Do not 	Do not presume you understand their concerns. Explore their thoughts.
Do 	Ensure the relative feels understood – summarise their ICE!
Reassure they will receive the help they need specifcally related to their concerns.
Example consultation structure when discussing end-of-life care with a
relative
Allow the person to do the majority of the talking, be fexible with what they hope to discuss. Te following
structure may be helpful:
1. Silences, exploring thoughts or stating what you sense can help initiate a sensitive consultation.
2. Check their understanding of the situation.
3. Collect all thoughts, concerns, fears, anxieties and expectations.
4. Be curious. Explore any cues they may have hinted. Silences or repeating words to encourage further
discussion may be useful here.
5. Understand the relative; are they well? Teir mood, their responsibilities as a carer, other stressors in
their life, the impact of the situation.
6. Summarise the ICE. A powerful way to help the relative feel understood and also focuses the manage-
ment plan.
7. Empathise. Te immensity of the situation and its potential impact on the person.
8. Enquire about communication between the relatives and patient.
9. Provide options/suggestions to manage each concern in turn.
10. Consider if other professionals or support groups may be helpful.
11. Empower with regard to their concerns.
12. Plan future meetings. Is anything required in the meantime?
11. Safety net: rescue treatment and contact numbers in the event of sudden deterioration.
If appropriate – in the event of death, do they know who to call? Usually, the GP or OOH GP to certify death,
followed by the undertaker.
➠ 234
Gynaecology and Breast – 4

-- 249 of 575 --

➠ 235
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Craig Mason 	46 years 	M
PMH 	No medical history
Medications 	No medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Carolyn Mason 	45 years 	F
Julianne Mason 	15 years 	F
Tomas Mason 	13 years 	M

-- 250 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Gynaecomastia
Sense ☐ 	I can sense you are worried.
ICE ☐ 	What has gone through your mind regarding what may have caused this? Is there anything
you fear this could be? Is there anything in particular you thought I might suggest?
Open ☐ 	Anything else that you have noticed? Or are concerned about?
Flags ☐ 	Have you felt any lumps in the breast? Or elsewhere, for example the testicles? Any other
symptoms elsewhere? For example, are your bowels normal? Any symptoms in the chest
or tummy?
Risk ☐ 	Is it painful? Do you have a cough or any breathing problems? Any pain in the chest? Or
weight loss? Do you smoke?
History ☐ 	You are otherwise well? Have you taken any medications or any supplements? What is in
this supplement? How much alcohol do you drink? I’m interested to know more about you.
Do you work? Do you live with anyone?
Impact ☐ 	Has this afected you or your relationship?
Curious ☐ 	What led you to start taking supplements?
SummarICE ☐ 	So to summarise, you have noticed your breasts have enlarged and this started afer the
addition of a body-building supplement. You are otherwise well with no symptoms. In the
back of your mind, you fear this could be a cancer, or that I may suggest you need to go to
a breast team. Have I understood correctly?
Empathy ☐ 	I can hear this has been a fright.
Impression ☐ 	I think you have developed breast tissue, which in men is called gynaecomastia.
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across this?
Explanation ☐ It has many diferent causes. In your case I believe it has been caused by the supplement. I
think it is unlikely this will be cancer.
Examination ☐ However, I would like to examine you. Would you be able to come down to the surgery? I
would check your height and weight, examine your chest to rule out any worrying breast
lumps, and check your liver and neck looking for signs of any other underlying cause. It
would be helpful to check your testicles are normal too as sometimes abnormal hormone
release from testicles can cause gynaecomastia. If you were happy for me to do this, I would
ask a chaperone to be present. Presuming your examination confrms my suspicion, I would
expect your breasts to go back to normal a month or two afer stopping the supplement.
Recommend ☐ I appreciate you wanted to increase your muscle tone but taking a supplement has risks,
especially if from the internet and we do not know what is in the product. If I fnd any
abnormal lump, you may need to see a specialist or we may need to do some blood tests.
Empower ☐ 	Do you think you will talk to your wife about our consultation today? Can you think of
other ways to improve your ftness? Eating a varied diet that contains natural proteins and
gradually improving your ftness is healthy.
Future ☐ 	You seem interested in your general health; would this be something you would like to
talk more about? Is there anything specifc that worries you about your general health?
What tests did you have in mind? When you come down, ask reception to make you an
appointment with the nurse for a cholesterol and blood pressure check.
Specifcs ☐ 	I have booked you in at 3 p.m. Presuming all is well we can catch up in a month to see if
there has been improvement and discuss your general health. Sometimes it takes up to
12 months to settle completely. Do you think reducing the amount of fat in your diet and
increasing exercise is something you could do?
Safety net ☐ 	If you notice anything new, symptoms or lumps, then tell me straight away please.
➠ 236
Gynaecology and Breast – 5

-- 251 of 575 --

➠ 237	
Patient’s Story 	Gynaecomastia
Doctor’s notes Craig Mason, 46 years. PMH: none. Medications: none.
How to act 	Concerned.
PC 	‘I’m worried that my chest has grown. It’s like I have breasts.’
History 	Your breasts have started to appear in the last few months.
Tey are not painful. You have no PMH.
Social 	You live with your wife and two children. Estate agent. Minimal alcohol. No stress.
You started using a body-building treatment 6 months ago.
Your wife encouraged you to go to the gym and tone up.
You do not know what is in the supplement, you get it from the internet.
ICE 	You think it may be fat as you have put on weight.
At the back of your mind, you hope it’s not breast cancer.
Your fear would be being sent to a clinic full of women.
You have no idea what the doctor may suggest.
Late in the consultation, say you were worried about a decline in your health.
You hope the GP ofers a check-up including blood pressure and cholesterol.
You are happy to come to the surgery for an examination.
Examination 	Bilateral gynaecomastia, no lymphadenopathy.
No hepatomegaly and no palpable thyroid.
BMI 26.
Gynaecology and Breast – 5

-- 252 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Gynaecomastia
Causes of gynaecomastia1
Idiopathic
Physiological 	In teens and elderly.
Infection 	Mumps.
Tumours 	Lung (there may be an increased β-hCG) and testicular.
Systemic disease 	Liver, thyrotoxicosis.
Iatrogenic 	Drugs, steroids, PPIs, TCAs.
Hormonal 	Hyperprolactinaemia, hypogonadism.
Alcohol
Examination1
Breast examination and lymphadenopathy.
Signs of hyperthyroidism or goitre.
Chronic liver disease.
BMI.
Testicular examination.
Investigation
Not required in: 	teens, if typical senile changes or if obvious iatrogenic cause.1
Consider 	TFT, LFT, GGT, U&E, testosterone, prolactin, LH, β-hCG, oestradiol, DHEA,
SHBG.1
If lung cancer suspected 	CXR.
Testicular pain or mass 	USS testes.
Mammography 	Only if cancer is suspected.
Genetic cause suspected 	Chromosomal karyotyping.
Management
Treat the cause, stop the drug and follow-up in 1/12.
Prognosis
Usually 1–12/12 to resolve afer treating the cause.
In adolescent boys, physiological gynaecomastia is common and usually transitory. Reassurance can be
given that most cases (90%) resolve within 3 years.1
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for a useful article on Gynaecomastia
➠ 238
Gynaecology and Breast – 5

-- 253 of 575 --

➠ 239	
Extra Notes 	Menopause and HRT
Symptoms 	Flushes, vaginal dryness, mood changes, low libido and urinary symptoms. Also sleep
disturbance and ofen joint and muscle pains, headaches and fatigue.1
FSH testing
Measurement of FSH is unreliable whilst taking HRT.2 Similarly FSH shouldn’t be used to diagnose
menopause in women using COCP, POP or high-dose progestogens.1
Consider using FSH to diagnose menopause in women aged 40–45 with changes in their cycle or vasomotor
symptoms, or women <40 in whom POI is suspected.1
FSH testing may be helpful in women aged 50–55 taking POP or using IMP or LNG-IUS. If FSH is >30 IU/L,
contraception can be stopped afer 1 more year for any woman over 50 years. If FSH is <30 IU/L, contra-
ception should be continued and FSH measured again afer 1 year.2
General advice Exercise, cotton clothing. Avoid: cafeine, spicy foods, smoking and alcohol.
CBT may be helpful.1
Premature menopause
POI is confrmed if FSH is raised on two samples 4–6 weeks apart in women aged under <40.
Ofer women a choice of HRT or a CHC unless contraindicated (e.g. hormone sensitive cancer).1 NICE
advises explaining to patients the importance of starting and continuing hormonal treatment until the age of
the natural menopause and that this will ofer bone protection and may beneft BP. Te risk of cardiovascular
disease and breast cancer is low in this age group.1
Ensure sufcient dietary calcium intake (blood tests and dietary calcium calculators) and encourage
weight-bearing exercises to prevent the risk of osteoporosis and fragility fractures.
Contraception 	Do not rely on HRT for contraception.2
Options: 	Mirena (change every 5 years if used for endometrial protection)2 + oestrogen-only HRT.
Te combination of Mirena with oestrogen-only patches provides both contraception with
reduced VTE risk.
POP + sequential HRT. ‘All progestogen-only methods of contraception are safe to use as
contraception alongside sequential HRT.’2
‘A woman who is under 50 years and free of all risk factors for venous and arterial
disease can use a low-oestrogen combined oral contraceptive pill to provide both relief of
menopausal symptoms and contraception; it is recommended that the oral contraceptive
be stopped at 50 years of age since there are more suitable alternatives.’3
SSRIs/SNRIs4 	For vasomotor symptoms consider a trial of SSRIs (of label) or SNRIs (of label) for 2 weeks
in the frst place. For mood disorders, consider self-help resources and a trial of CBT (low
mood/anxiety). Use antidepressants if confrmed diagnosis of anxiety/depression. Beware
that SSRIs paroxetine and fuoxetine should not be ofered to women with breast cancer
who are taking tamoxifen as they may inhibit its efect.
Gynaecology and Breast

-- 254 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	HRT Risks
VTE risk 	Transdermal is safer for menopausal women who are at increased risk of this, including
those with a BMI >30 kg/m 2
. Consider asking for advice from haematology when consid-
ering HRT in women at high risk of VTE.1
CVD risk 	Cardiovascular risk factors are not a contraindication to HRT as long as they are optimally
managed. Oestrogen-alone HRT is associated with no, or reduced, risk of coronary heart
disease. HRT with oestrogen and progestogen does not increase in the risk of coronary
heart disease in women under 60 years. 1
Stroke risk 	HRT involving oral oestrogen (but not transdermal) is associated with a small increase in
the risk of stroke. 1
T2DM risk 	HRT does not increase the risk of diabetes or afect glucose control.
Breast risk 	When using oestrogen-only HRT, there is little or no change in the risk of breast cancer,
but HRT with oestrogen and progestogen can be associated with an increased risk. Any
increase in risk reduces afer stopping HRT and is related to the duration of treatment.1
Note a recent study suggested the risk of breast cancer from combined HRT has been
underestimated. 5
Dementia risk 	Unknown. 1
How given 	HRT is available as tablets, skin patches, gels, nasal spray or a vaginal ring.
Preparations 	If the woman has had a hysterectomy – oestrogen only.
If still having periods – a cyclical combined HRT to avoid random spotting.
If periods have stopped – a continuous combined HRT product.
Safety net 	If leg swelling/pain, or any sign of stroke, seek immediate help.
Inform of the importance of BP monitoring and provide breast awareness advice.
Follow-up 	3 months, then 6-monthly.
Side effects 	Nausea, breast pain, leg cramps. Skin irritation from patches. See the BNF.
Stopping HRT 	Can be either immediate or gradual. Tip – patches can be cut down in size gradually.
Gradually reducing HRT may reduce the risk of recurrence of symptoms.1
Vaginal
dryness 	Oestrogen pessary for vaginal atrophy combined with Replens for dryness.
You may consider vaginal oestrogen for women who cannot take HRT (contraindication)
afer seeking advice. 4
Contraindications
to use of topical
oestrogens 	Active breast cancer and undiagnosed vaginal or uterine bleeding.
Current or previous thromboembolic event or thrombophilic disorder. Acute liver disease
or history of this, if still have abnormal LFTs. Porphyria. See reference for full list.6 Te
BNF advises that endometrial safety is unknown if long-term or repeated use, so patients
should have ‘annual break’ to reassess continuing need. Any bleeding or spotting during
treatment should be investigated including endometrial biopsy.6
➠ 240
 	See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for useful PILs in gynaecology
Gynaecology and Breast

-- 255 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Endometriosis
➠ 241
Symptoms 	Cyclical or chronic pelvic or ovulation pain. Pelvic or elsewhere.
Dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia and deep dyspareunia.
Pre-menstrual or post-menstrual spotting.
Cyclical or peri-menstrual bladder or bowel symptoms.
Infertility in association with 1 or more of the above.
O/E 	Likely to be normal. Tere may be a fxed retroverted uterus or tenderness.
Investigations 	USS is likely to be normal. Endometriosis may be identifed on MRI but patients are usually
ofered a laparoscopy for the diagnosis.
GP treatment1 	NSAID – mefenamic acid or paracetamol – 3 month trial.
OCP – may back-to-back (of licence).
Progestogen – Mirena or implant.
See NICE guidelines for a very useful fowchart about hormonal treatment.
Complications Infertility.
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for helpful links to organisations for women with
endometriosis
Due to difculty making the diagnosis, consider referring all women with suspected endometriosis to a
gynaecologist to confrm the diagnosis (laparoscopy).
In particular, ofer referral for women with unconfrmed endometriosis if:2
• 	Symptoms are severe, persistent or recurrent.
• 	Pelvic signs of endometriosis.
• 	Initial management is not efective, not tolerated or is contraindicated.
Gynaecology and Breast

-- 256 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Ovarian Cysts1–3
Ovarian cyst management
Post-menopausal women
In all post-menopausal women with an ovarian cyst, suggest measurement of serum CA125 in the report
Simple cysts
Simple cyst ≤5 cm
Simple cyst >5 cm
Recommend rescan with CA125 measurements every 4 months for 1 year
If no change after 1 year (3 scans) consider cessation of scanning if there is no
clinical concern
Recommend an urgent 2-week wait referral to gynaecological oncology. MRI
assessment should be considered
Complex cysts
Any complex cyst
Recommend an urgent 2-week referral to gynaecological oncology, fax report to
GP/referring clinician
Pre-menopausal women
Simple cysts
Simple cyst ≤5 cm
No follow-up required unless there is clinical concern. A statement to this effect
should be included in the report
Simple cyst 5–7 cm 	Rescan in 6–8 weeks
If resolved or decreased in size, no follow-up required
If persisting or increased in size suggest gynaecology referral
Simple cyst >7 cm 	Suggest gynaecological referral. MRI assessment should be considered by
gynaecologist
Complex cysts
Any typical dermoid cyst 	Suggest gynaecology referral
Haemorrhagic cyst 	Rescan in 6–8 weeks to ensure resolution. If not resolved, likely to be
endometrioma (follow recommendations for endometriotic cysts)
Endometriotic cysts:
Symptomatic, any size
Asymptomatic
• <5 cm
• >5 cm
Suggest gynaecology referral
Rescan in 6 weeks, if it persists, suggest gynaecology referral
Suggest gynaecology referral
Complex cysts with
features suspicious for
ovarian malignancy
Recommend an urgent 2WW referral to gynaecological oncology
Fax report to GP/referring clinician
Recommend measurement of CA125
(Also LDH, α-FP and Beta-hCG if patient <40 years of age)
Any woman/girl before the 19th birthday should be managed jointly by paediatric
and gynaecological oncology MDT
With thanks to Miss Natalia Price for permission to include this Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust guidance. Price N., Traill Z., Goldstein M., et al. Management of ovarian cysts. Joint PCT/Radiology/
Gynaecology/Gynae Oncology guidelines. As guidance updates, the link can be found at the Link Hub at
CompleteMRCGP.co.uk
Gynaecology and Breast	
➠ 242

-- 257 of 575 --

CHAPTER 10 OVERVIEW
Haematology
➠ 243
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Haematology
Learning points in this
chapter include:
1 	Suspected DVT 	‘Symptoms and signs of haematological
disorders…DVT or PE’
‘Evolving new agents for anticoagulation
treatment and prophylaxis in primary care. Their
appropriate use as an alternative to warfarin and
the assessment of their potential beneft and risk’
‘Anticoagulants: indications, initiation,
management and reversal/withdrawal including
heparin, warfarin, direct oral anticoagulants such
as dabigatran, drug interactions and contra-
indications’
Diagnosis and treatment
of DVT
Wells’ score
Treating DVT
Capacity
2 	Myeloma 	‘Common and important conditions…multiple
myeloma’
‘Relevant primary care investigations (e.g. X-rays,
paraprotein urine testing in myeloma)’
‘Disorders of calcium metabolism, e.g. myeloma’1
Diagnosis and management
of myeloma
3 	Splenectomy 	‘Common and important conditions…
splenectomy’
‘Health advice for travellers’
Splenectomy – indications,
consequences, risks
Advice for patients after
splenectomy
Travel risks after
splenectomy
4 	Anaemia 	‘Common and important conditions – anaemia
and its causes including iron, folate and vitamin
B12 defciency, sideroblastic, haemolytic, chronic
disease’
‘Identify symptoms that are within the range of
normal or self-limiting illness and differentiate
them from underlying pathology, e.g. anaemia’
Differential diagnosis of
tiredness in children
Management of anaemia in
children
5 	Henoch–
Schönlein
Purpura
‘Purpura: recognition and causes such as drug-
induced, Henoch–Schönlein’
Diagnosis and management
of HSP
Extra
Notes
Capacity
DOACs
Assessing capacity
Apixaban for DVT/PE

-- 258 of 575 --

CHAPTER 10 REFERENCES
Suspected DVT
1. 	NICE guideline NG158. Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis, management and thrombophilia testing.
Mar 2020.
2. 	NICE CKS. Anticoagulation – oral. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/anticoagulation-oral/ Jan 2021.
3. 	NICE CKS. Deep vein thrombosis. (Includes Wells’ score.) https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/deep-vein-thrombosis/
management/management/ Nov 2020.
Myeloma
1. 	https://www.myeloma.org.uk/understanding-myeloma/what-is-myeloma/
2. 	NICE CKS. Multiple myeloma. https://cks.nice.org.uk/multiple-myeloma. Jan 2021.
Splenectomy
1. 	https://patient.info/doctor/splenectomy-and-hyposplenism. Aug 2020.
2. 	https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/399191/
Splenectomy_DL_Leafet_06_WEB__2_.pdf
3. 	Immunisation against infectious disease – the Green Book (latest edition); Public Health England. https://www.gov.
uk/government/collections/immunisation-against-infectious-disease-the-green-book#the-green-book
Anaemia
1. 	Haemoglobin concentrations for the diagnosis of anaemia and assessment of severity: WHO/NMH/NHD/MNM/
11.1 . World Health Organization 2011. https://www.who.int/vmnis/indicators/haemoglobin.pdf
2. 	British National Formulary for Children.
Henoch–Schönlein Purpura
1. 	https://patient.info/doctor/henoch-schonlein-purpura-pro. Jun 2019.
Haematology
1. 	https://bnf.nice.org.uk/drug/apixaban.html
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 244
Haematology

-- 259 of 575 --

➠ 245
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Raymond Styles 	86 years 	M
PMH 	Ankle fracture placed in cast 3 weeks ago.
Prostate cancer
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	Recent U&E, LFT normal
Household 	No household contacts registered

-- 260 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Suspected DVT
Open ☐ 	I’m pleased your carer called. Tell me more about this pain and swelling. Is there anything
else you have noticed?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think has caused the pain and swelling in your leg? Is there anything you fear
it may be? What do you think we should do?
Flags ☐ 	Do you feel breathless? Are you coughing up anything? Any blood? Do you have any pain
in your chest? Have you had a temperature?
Sense ☐ 	You don’t seem worried.
History ☐ 	How are you in general? Do you have any other family?
Curious ☐ 	Tell me more about your experience of hospital.
Impact ☐ 	Tings must have been hard since you lost Maggie. How do you spend your days?
O/E ☐ 	Your carer kindly sent me a photo, I can see your lower right leg looks swollen and is red
all over. Could you squeeze the back of your leg and tell me if it hurts? If you press on your
skin does it leave a dimple? How far up your leg does that happen?
Empathy ☐ 	I hear that you do not want to have the same experience as your wife and will not go to
hospital.
Empower ☐ 	No one will force you. I must explain to you what I think so you can make an informed
decision, but you are in charge.
SummarICE ☐ 	Although you suspect the pain and swelling may be serious, you are clear that you don’t
want to go into hospital but might be willing to have treatment at home, so long as it is
straightforward and doesn’t need blood tests.
Impression ☐ 	I believe you have a blood clot in your leg called a DVT. Tere is a real risk that this could
travel to your lungs and make you very ill – you could even die from this. Your broken leg
has made you less mobile and having prostate cancer puts you at increased risk, therefore
I think this is most likely.
Recommend ☐ I would like to arrange for you to go to the hospital for a scan of your veins. At the hospital
I would expect them to do a scan and a blood test so they could fnd out exactly what is
wrong. If I were to explain to the medical staf your previous experience and tell them you
would want to come home as soon as possible, would this be okay?
InCludE ☐ 	Can I check that we have understood each other correctly? You are aware that I believe you
should go to hospital for tests, and not going to hospital may mean ongoing pain in your
leg or serious breathing problems and you could die from this. Can you repeat to me what
we have just talked about so I can check you understand? Tank you.
Options ☐ 	If you won’t go to hospital, would you take some tablets at home that would thin your blood?
Tey make it less likely that any blood clot goes to your lungs. Te downside of this tablet
is it can make you more likely to bleed and, rarely, they can cause serious bleeding. Okay
good.
Explanation ☐ Te tablet is called apixaban. You should take it twice a day and it’s important to keep tak-
ing it and not stop it – otherwise your blood would soon start to clot again and this could
cause serious problems. I will ask the nurse to call tomorrow to take a blood test from you
to make sure your kidneys and liver are working well - but you won’t need regular blood
tests. Do you have any questions?
Future ☐ 	I suggest taking paracetamol, two tablets regularly for pain relief. Don’t take ibuprofen as
this interferes with apixaban. I will write to the DVT clinic to explain about your situation
and get advice about how long you should take the apixaban but it is likely to be 3 months.
Safety net ☐ 	If you get short of breath, chest pain, cough up blood or your leg swelling or pain gets
worse, please call the surgery, 111 if the surgery is closed or 999 if you have changed your
mind about hospital. Afer starting the apixaban, if you notice any bleeding, please ring for
advice straight away.
➠ 246
Haematology – 1

-- 261 of 575 --

➠ 247	
Patient’s Story 	Suspected DVT
Doctor’s notes Raymond Styles, 86 years.
PMH: lef ankle fracture placed in cast 3 weeks ago. Prostate cancer. Medications: none.
How to act 	Respectful and apologetic. Dismissive of your symptoms.
Under no circumstances are you going to hospital for any tests. You will accept tablets to
thin your blood but want as little fuss as possible.
PC 	‘Doctor, I’m sorry they called you. I’m fne now.’
History 	You have prostate cancer. You were ofered but declined hormone treatment for this but are
currently not troubled by it.
Your carer called the doctor because she noticed that your right leg was swollen.
You feel a little cross about this as you don’t like to waste the doctor’s time.
You have no chest pain or breathlessness.
You frst noticed your leg swelling and pain yesterday. No fever. No confusion.
You have never felt this pain before. ‘I must have pulled a muscle.’
Social 	You live alone with four times daily care at present whilst your leg is in cast.
You have no family.
ICE 	You do not know what has caused the pain and swelling. You suspect it may be serious.
If asked about any negative experiences: your wife, Maggie, died in the hospital and you do
not want to have the same happen to you. Refuse to go to hospital whatever the doctor says.
You will reluctantly accept tablets if the doctor persuades you but do not want injections
or anything that needs frequent blood tests for monitoring, such as warfarin.
Examination
if by phone 	Clearly swollen lower right leg with generalised redness, lef leg in cast. Patient states calf
is painful and pitting oedema present to knee level.
Examination
if F2F 	Sats 95%. RR 18. HR 108 bpm. Chest exam normal. Apyrexial. Lef leg in cast. Right leg red
and swollen, with tenderness in the calf and pitting oedema to knee. Calf circumference
cannot be compared because lef leg is in a cast.
Reproduced from Browse’s Introduction to the Symptoms and Signs of Surgical Disease (2021), CRC Press.
With thanks to Kevin Burnand, Bijan Modarai and Ashish Patel.
Haematology – 1

-- 262 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Suspected DVT1,2
Tis case is testing your ability to clinically assess a patient, to prescribe appropriately but also tests your
ability to assess capacity.
Assessing capacity – see Extra Notes, Chapter 16
Two-level DVT Wells’ score3
NB – if suspect DVT in a woman who is pregnant or has given birth in the last 6 weeks – refer for same-day
assessment and management. Otherwise use two-level DVT Wells’ score: Score 1 point for:
• 	Active cancer (treatment ongoing, within the last 6 months, or palliative).
• 	Paralysis, paresis or recent plaster immobilisation of the legs.
• 	Bedbound for 3 days or more, or major surgery within the last 12 weeks requiring general or regional
anaesthesia.
• 	Localised tenderness along the distribution of the deep venous system (such as the back of the calf).
• 	Entire leg is swollen.
• 	Calf swelling ≥3 cm compared with the asymptomatic leg.
• 	Pitting oedema present in symptomatic leg only.
• 	Collateral superfcial veins (non-varicose).
• 	Previously documented DVT.
Subtract two points if an alternative cause is considered at least as likely as DVT.
Score ≥2 DVT is likely, <2 unlikely.
DVT pathway
For people who are likely to have DVT as assessed above:
• 	Follow local pathways (e.g. assessment on ambulatory medical unit) to arrange an urgent USS of the
leg – ideally within 4 hours.
• 	If this is not possible, arrange D-dimer and start anticoagulation. Te scan should be done within 24
hours.
For people who are unlikely to have DVT (based on the results of the two-level DVT Wells’ score):
• 	Ofer D-dimer test frst. If results within 4 hours not possible then ofer interim anticoagulation until
result is available. In practice this is likely to involve referral to haematology through your local VTE
pathway.
• 	If D-dimer positive arrange USS of leg.
• 	If D-dimer test is negative stop treatment and consider alternative diagnosis.
If interim therapeutic anticoagulation is required:
• 	First line: apixaban or rivaroxaban (follow local formulary).
• 	Second-line options: LMWH for 5 days followed by dabigatran, edoxaban or LMWH + warfarin.
• 	Consider comorbidities, contraindications and patient choice when selecting the anticoagulant.
• 	Check FBC, renal function, LFT, PT and APTT. Do not wait for result before treating. Ensure results
reviewed within 24 hours.
➠ 248
Haematology – 1

-- 263 of 575 --

➠ 249
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	William Jeferies 	65 years 	M
PMH 	Nil
Medications 	Paracetamol 1 g QDS
Naproxen 500 mg TDS
Allergies 	None
Consultations 	Several consultations for back ache over the last 3 months.
Prescribed paracetamol, codeine and NSAIDs. Had private
physiotherapy.
1 month ago – blood sugar, HbA1c and PSA – all normal.
1 week ago – ‘Continues to c/o low back pain. No neurological
symptoms or signs. Full examination of back and neurology of
legs – normal. Blood tests arranged.’
Investigations 	1 week ago:
FBC 	Hb 110 g/L. Normochromic normocytic picture
ESR 	90
U&E 	Urea 11.3 mmol/LL (2.5–7.8)
Creatinine 162 mol/L (59.0–104.0)
Calcium – 2.8 mmol/L (normal range
2.1–2.6 mmol/L)
eGFR 	54 mL/min/1.73 m2
Lab comment ‘CKD stage 3’
Total protein 120 g/L (60–80 g/L)
Lab comment – ‘Sample sent for electrophoresis. Results to
follow. Please send urine for Bence Jones protein’.
Household 	Mary Jeferies 	65 years 	F

-- 264 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Myeloma
Open ☐ 	Hello Mr Jeferies. Yes, I do have your results. But as we haven’t spoken before, it would help me
to fnd out more about you frst. Please tell me what symptoms led to the tests?
History ☐ 	Tell me more about the backache, e.g. where is it and when do you notice it most? Have you had
any other symptoms such as tiredness or weight loss? Any constipation? How is your mood?
Impact ☐ 	You mentioned the backache interferes with gardening. Does it stop you doing anything else
that you want to do?
Curious ☐ 	What does Mary think? What has made her think you are muddled? You mentioned you are
retired. What was your work? How do you spend your days in retirement?
Flags☐ 	Any weakness or numbness in your legs? An odd question, this, but are you always aware when
your bladder is full? Any dribbling of urine? Any numbness around the back passage? Tat’s
good to hear, thank you.
Risk ☐ 	Has any relative had similar symptoms?
ICE ☐ 	What’s gone through your mind? You sound worried – what’s your worst fear? Is there anything
in your mind you were hoping I might be able to do, as well as giving you the results?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, for the last 6 months or so you have been having troublesome low back pain, not getting
better with either physiotherapy or painkillers and interfering with your ability to look afer your
garden, play golf and drive your car to see your grandchildren. You are worried it might be from
prostate cancer. You had some blood tests last week and are here for the results.
Empathy ☐ 	Tis has been a worrying time for you and you can’t spend your retirement how you wish.
InCludE ☐ 	Tankfully, I don’t think this is prostate cancer as you had a normal PSA test and the symptoms
don’t ft. I think it’s likely that the muddled thinking that your wife has noticed will improve with
treatment and I’m also very hopeful you will be able to get back to gardening very soon.
Explanation ☐ 	Your blood test results appear to explain many of your symptoms. You are slightly anaemic, which
will tend to make you tired. Your kidneys are not working as well as usual. We have also found
more protein in your bloodstream than is usual and it is possible that you may have a condition
called myeloma. Your calcium is also a little high which would ft with this.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of myeloma or known anyone with this?
Explanation ☐ 	Myeloma is a condition where some of the cells in your bone marrow, called plasma cells, start
to be more active than they should be and produce too much of a particular protein called
immunoglobulin. Te cells start to crowd out other cells in the bone marrow, so the body can’t
make its normal red and white cells, making you anaemic. Tese excess proteins can also block
up small tubes in the kidneys so they can’t work as well.
Options ☐ 	I would like to get an urgent urine test done to measure how much protein is passing through
the kidneys. Tis and a further blood test may confrm the diagnosis. If so, I would then suggest
you see a blood specialist called a haematologist who will be able to start treatment. We would
arrange this within 2 weeks. Do you have any questions at this stage?
Explanation ☐ 	No, this isn’t leukaemia, although it is a type of blood cancer. At the hospital I expect the doctors
will examine you and take more blood tests. Tey may want to take a sample of your bone mar-
row, look at this under the microscope and do a scan to look at all your bones. Tis will guide
treatment, which may be chemotherapy, steroids or other drugs to bring this under control.
Empower ☐ 	Tere are some things you can do. Please stop the naproxen as this may afect your kidneys.
Paracetamol and codeine are safe. Drink plenty of fuids so you are well hydrated and to help
your kidneys. Exercise will help – perhaps a daily walk and build up the distance slowly.
Future ☐ 	May I book you an appointment for next week so we can talk through the rest of your results
and I will answer any questions you have? We will also need to discuss immunising you against
pneumonia and what to do if you get any infection.
Safety net ☐ 	If you get numbness around the back passage, lose that feeling of your bladder being full, or get
weakness of the legs, you must contact a doctor at once, even at night or the weekend.
Specifcs ☐ 	If you begin to feel very thirsty, sick, tired or have increased aches and pains, please telephone
reception to speak to me or another doctor the same day as this could be a sign that your calcium
levels have become too high.
➠ 250
Haematology – 2

-- 265 of 575 --

➠ 251	
Patient’s Story 	Myeloma
Doctor’s notes William Jeferies, 65 years.
How to act 	In discomfort with your back – it hurts when you walk. Worried.
PC 	‘I’ve phoned for my blood test results – does it explain why I’ve been getting back pain?'
History 	For the last 3 months you have had troublesome back pain. Initially you thought you had
done too much in the allotment. You took some paracetamol and ibuprofen, which did not
help, and then went to a private physiotherapist. He gave you some exercises and you have
been following these but no real improvement. Te back pain is getting worse and you can
no longer play golf. You are now in pain all the time and it’s keeping you awake. You have
lost a little weight without trying. You have been more tired than usual, and your muscles
seem weak (e.g. when gardening). You have also been constipated and drinking more. Te
doctor thought you might have diabetes but a fasting blood sugar and HbA1c were com-
pletely normal. A week ago, you saw a diferent doctor who did a full examination of your
back and legs (normal) and arranged some more blood tests. You are here for the results.
Social 	You are a retired businessman and enjoy gardening as a hobby. You have always been ft and
well and played sport including golf. You live with your wife who is also retired and have
two grown-up children who live about 100 miles away and four grandchildren. Driving to
see the grandchildren is really uncomfortable so you are going less ofen and miss these
visits.
ICE 	Ideas 	Your good friend had back ache which turned out to be secondaries from
prostate cancer.
Your wife has noticed you are muddled at times – but you don’t think so.
It’s just there’s a lot on your mind.
Te blood test may have shown something to explain the back pain.
Concerns 	Could this be cancer?
Is it going to get better?
What can you do to help me get back to my gardening?
Expectations 	You hope the doctor will have found out what is wrong and you hope it’s
nothing serious like cancer.
You have never heard of myeloma and will ask the doctor what it is if this is
mentioned. If ‘blood cancer’ is mentioned, ask ‘Is it leukaemia?’ A friend’s
son had this and died when he was 6.
Blood results 	Mild anaemia, normochromic, normocytic.
ESR raised.
U&E show CKD stage 3.
Total protein is raised.
Haematology – 2

-- 266 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Myeloma1,2
What is it? 	A blood cancer arising from plasma cells. Represents 2% of all cancers. Mainly aged >65
years although can be much younger.
When to suspect Adults, especially if > 60 years with
• 	Unexplained back pain, especially thoracic or lower back.
• 	Fatigue (30%).
• 	Symptoms of hypercalcaemia (30%), e.g. pain (bone, abdominal), low mood, confu-
sion, muscle weakness, constipation, thirst, polyuria.
• 	Weight loss (25%).
• 	Hyperviscosity symptoms, e.g. headache, cognitive impairment, visual disturbance,
mucosal bleeding (7%).
• 	Cord compression symptoms.
• 	Fever (1%).
• 	Onset ofen gradual may be picked up following pathological fracture or recurrent
infection.
Examination 	Normal or hepatomegaly (4%), splenomegaly (1%), lymphadenopathy (1%).
Blood tests 	FBC – normochromic, normocytic anaemia.
U&E – renal impairment (50%).
Bone profle – hypercalcaemia (15%).
Raised ESR, serum protein or globulin.
Management 	Blood tests – FBC, serum calcium, PV or ESR, U&E.
Consider X-rays of painful areas to rule out pathological fractures.
Arrange urgent plasma and urine protein electrophoresis (ideally within 48 hours) – be
aware negative in 1–2% people with myeloma.
Urgent admission if suspected cord compression, corrected calcium >2.9 or AKI.
Otherwise – haematology 2WW referral.
Secondary care Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy (monoclonal plasma cells).
MRI to detect extent of bone disease. Low-dose CT scan if MRI unsuitable or declined.
Plain X-ray of spine, skull, chest, pelvis and upper limbs if MRI and CT unsuitable or
declined.
Treatment – chemotherapy, steroids, anaemia treatments, bisphosphonates for pain,
immunomodulatory therapy. Stem cell transplant.
Ongoing
primary care 	Treat infections promptly.
Manage pain, e.g. paracetamol +/− codeine (avoid NSAIDs).
Ofer fu and pneumococcal vaccination.
Monitor mental health and ofer help where needed.
Support and advise family and carers, e.g. advise exercise and adequate hydration.
Discuss role of palliative care, when appropriate.
Advise re DLA, PIP payments.
➠ 252
Haematology – 2

-- 267 of 575 --

➠ 253
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	William Ashfeld 	19 years 	M
PMH 	Splenectomy – 3 months ago
Medications 	None
Allergies 	None
Consultations 	None
Investigations 	None
Household 	Jennifer Ashfeld 	45 years 	F
Peter Ashfeld 	44 years 	M
Fiona Ashfeld 	12 years 	F

-- 268 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Splenectomy
Open ☐ 	Hello William, yes – let’s talk about that. I’m sorry to hear you had to have your spleen removed.
What led to that?
History ☐ 	Were you knocked out by the accident? Did you have any other injuries, for example broken
bones or cuts? Did you need a blood transfusion?
Impact ☐ 	And tell me about you. You mentioned a gap year? What were your plans for the year? And when
the year is over, what are you hoping to do next?
ICE ☐ 	Do you have questions in your mind about what happened in Tailand? How are you hoping I
can help today? Your mum sounds worried – if she were here now, what would she say?
Curious ☐ 	Do you know what your spleen does? Have you read up about it? What did the doctors in
Tailand tell you about life afer splenectomy?
Experience ☐ 	Have you known anyone who has had their spleen removed? I’m sorry to hear about your gran.
Risk ☐ 	Where do you plan to travel next?
Flags☐ 	In the past, have you ever had any serious infections, such as pneumonia?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you are keen to move on and get back to life as normal, and that’s very understandable.
Empathy ☐ 	It must have been very frustrating to have to come home and continue to hear about all the
adventures your friends are having.
SummarICE ☐ 	You had your spleen removed in Tailand afer an accident and would really like to resume your
gap year, travelling to India and around the Far East. You’re not sure what it means to have no
spleen, but your mum thinks you should take antibiotics.
Impression ☐ 	You feel almost back to full ftness and would ideally like the all-clear from me.
Explanation ☐ 	William – it’s great that you are feeling better but there are some things we need to talk about.
Te spleen is important for fghting infection and you are now more at risk of getting infec-
tions – including signifcant ones, such as pneumonia or malaria, and these may afect your
health. We need to do everything we can to avoid you getting a serious infection like your gran.
InCludE ☐ 	Let’s think about whether you also need to take antibiotics every day, to prevent infection, as
your mother thought. As you are aged over 16 and under 50, and have been healthy in the past,
I don’t think you need to, but you should defnitely have a supply to keep at home in case you get
a fever. Are you okay taking penicillin – not allergic to it? Good. I will give you a prescription for
an antibiotic called amoxicillin which is efective against many bacteria. If you need to take it to
treat an infection, you take it three times a day. We should also make sure you are immunised
against common illnesses, including fu and pneumonia. Would you like to have these jabs?
Options ☐ 	Going to India is now riskier for you. Malaria is common and this infection, ofen serious and
potentially fatal for anyone, could be very risky indeed. If you do go, please take all precautions
against mosquito bites: protection in the evening – long sleeves and long trousers, tuck in your
socks, use strong DEET repellent and mosquito nets overnight. Malarial mosquitoes are most
active between dusk and dawn. Dog bites would also be risky for you because dog saliva contains
an unpleasant infection that could overwhelm your immune system.
Empower ☐ 	You said your plans were fexible: have you thought about travelling to a country that will be just
as interesting but safer for you because it’s non-malarial? Most countries that are further from
the equator are safe – check the WHO map online.
Recommend ☐ You could protect your health by choosing to travel somewhere else and still have an interest-
ing gap year. Whatever you do, you must ensure you have travel health insurance and tell your
insurers about the splenectomy.
Future ☐ 	You should carry a card with you at all times to let doctors know that you have had your spleen
removed – you can download this from the NHS website. Getting an alert bracelet, so it’s easy
for anyone to see in an emergency, is a good idea too.
Specifcs ☐ 	Always remind any doctor, dentist or other health professional that you have no spleen – you
might need antibiotics earlier in an illness than normal. Keep a supply of antibiotics at home and
carry them with you when you travel. Always check the expiry date as they do have a limited
shelf life. Please make an appointment with our nurse for fu and pneumonia jabs.
Safety net ☐ 	If you develop a fever, sore throat or bad cough, start the antibiotics and see a doctor ASAP.
➠ 254
Haematology – 3

-- 269 of 575 --

➠ 255	
Patient’s Story 	Splenectomy
Doctor’s notes William Ashfeld, 19 years.
How to act 	Confdent and cheerful.
PC 	‘So I had my spleen removed afer an accident in Tailand. I just want the all-clear to fy
back and carry on with my gap year.’
History 	You had been abroad for 1 month at the start of your gap year before university and were
travelling in Tailand where you went quad biking with friends. Te quad bike slipped on a
muddy track and you rolled down a bank with the bike on top of you. Tankfully you were
rescued and taken to the local hospital but were very ill, and had an operation. You were
not really aware of what went on but you had a big scar up and down your abdomen. You
don’t think you broke anything; no serious cuts and you are not sure if you had a transfu-
sion. You were ‘out of it’ for a few days. When you were well enough to be discharged, the
doctors told you they had removed your spleen and that you should talk to your doctor
at home about this. Your travel insurance arranged a fight back to the UK and you have
been convalescing for the last month. Your friends are still abroad, now in India, sending
you daily WhatsApp messages and photos that make you jealous and you want to go out to
join them. Your parents are very much against this, so you have come to the doctor to get
the all-clear. You have no frm plans for the year – just to have a good time travelling.
Social 	Lives with parents and younger sister. Due to start Edinburgh University next year to read
history.
ICE 	You have no real idea what your spleen does.
You regard this as an unfortunate incident that could have happened to anyone and
you want to get on with your gap year and your life. You think your parents are being
overprotective.
You want to know if there is anything you need to do or know about your spleen.
Your maternal grandmother had her spleen removed because of cancer and had to take an
antibiotic every day. She died of sepsis 2 years ago. You mother thinks you should be on an
antibiotic too and has asked you to raise this. ‘My mum thinks I need to be on antibiotics
all the time, like gran.’ If asked, gran got very sick with an infection – you think it was her
chest.
Haematology – 3

-- 270 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Splenectomy1–3
Why splenectomy? Planned – e.g. hypersplenism, lymphoma or as part of total gastrectomy.
Traumatic – due to an accident, or trauma during surgery (25% of all splenectomies).
Autosplenectomy – loss of spleen function (hyposplenism) due to:
• 	Sickle cell anaemia
• 	Coeliac disease
• 	Dermatitis herpetiformis
• 	Essential thrombocythemia (ETP)
• 	Ulcerative colitis.
Management of patients after splenectomy
Risks 	Overwhelming infection: major long-term risk, but largely preventable.
Most common are: pneumococcal, Hib, Neisseria meningitidis:
• 	Occurs in 4% patients, if no antibiotic prophylaxis.
• 	Mortality risk 50%.
E. coli, malaria and babesiosis (tick-borne malaria-like infection, common in USA and
parts of Europe).
Increased risk of severe falciparum malaria – use all possible antimalarial precautions
and preferably avoid travel to malarial areas.
Immunisations 	All routine immunisations for children and adults can be safely given.
Live vaccines okay before travel (e.g. yellow fever, live oral typhoid).
Give all vaccines at least 2 weeks before splenectomy, but delay for 3 months if patient
has been immunosuppressed, e.g. on steroids, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, methotrex-
ate. See Green Book.3
If non-immunised, give at the frst opportunity afer splenectomy.
Re-immunise every 5 years as levels of antibodies decline.
Under 2’s are at risk of vaccine failure – use PC7 where available as better response in
this age group.
Prophylactic antibiotics – recommended if patients are at ‘high risk’
High-risk patients generally <16 or >50.
Previous poor response to pneumococcal vaccine.
Previous invasive pneumococcal illness.
Underlying malignancy.
Use Pen V 250–500mg BD, or OD for compliance (or amoxicillin, or erythromycin).
Patients should take full therapeutic dose of antibiotic if pyrexia, malaise, shivering.
For all patients 	Carry a splenectomy card.
Wear an alert bracelet.
Be aware of risks of overseas travel – especially malaria and afer animal bites.
Patient records should be alerted. Vaccine and revaccination status clearly documented.
➠ 256
Haematology – 3

-- 271 of 575 --

➠ 257
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Connor McGowen 	9 years 	M
PMH 	None
Medications 	None
Allergies 	None
Consultations 	Four weeks ago by locum GP – mum noticed looks a little pale
and seems lethargic. Connor reporting feeling tired. No other
symptoms other than occasional abdominal cramps, usually
when has been a little constipated. No red fags. Mum worried
about coeliac disease due to family history (paternal cousin and
grandfather). Agree bloods then review.
Investigations 	FBC: Hb 97 g/L
MCV 78 f
WCC 7 × 109/L
Platelets 269 × 109/L
12, folate – normal. Ferritin low.
TFT normal
Coeliac screen normal
Household 	Shona McGowen 	42 years 	F
Patrick McGowen 	43 years 	M
Telephone consultation with mum – requests blood results.

-- 272 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Anaemia
Open ☐ 	How can I help? Yes, we do have the results. Could you tell me what led up to the blood
tests being taken?
ICE ☐ 	Was there anything particular you thought might be going on? Have you been worrying
about the results? How about Connor, is he concerned about anything? Other than going
through the results, was there anything else you were hoping for today?
History ☐ 	You mentioned Connor had seemed tired and pale before. How is he now?
Impact ☐ 	How is the tiredness afecting him? Has it interfered with his hobbies or school work? Has
it afected you as a family in any way?
Flags☐ 	Have any new symptoms developed since you saw my colleague? Any diarrhoea? Any blood
loss from anywhere such as nosebleeds or blood from his bottom? Any weight loss? Or
fever? Any bruising? Or lumps/bumps?
Risk ☐ 	What does Connor like to eat? Does he eat meat? What about green leafy vegetables? Do
you fnd it a struggle to give him a balanced diet? Does this worry you? Is there any family
history of anaemia or blood problems?
SummarICE ☐ 	So Connor has been more lethargic, just wanting to lie on the sofa afer school and has
appeared a little pale for the last couple of months. He hasn’t had any bowel trouble, weight
loss, fevers or any blood loss from anywhere. You try to encourage him to eat a balanced
diet but he prefers chips and pizza to meat and vegetables and, as this is ofen quicker, you
give in. You wondered about coeliac disease as two people on your husband’s side have this.
Shall we talk through the results?
Impression ☐ 	Most of Connor’s bloods were reassuring and in particular his test for coeliac disease was
negative. We did pick up one abnormality though. His blood count was a little low, some-
thing called anaemia.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of this? You’re right it is common in pregnancy and yes Connor’s anaemia
appears to be due to low iron.
Explanation ☐ When we are short of iron, our red blood cells can’t carry as much oxygen around and
this can make us feel tired. Te red blood cells have less of something called haemoglobin
which carries the oxygen but this also makes the blood red so this is why some people with
anaemia look pale. Tere are lots of reasons why someone can be short of iron. In Connor’s
case it is likely that he is not getting enough in his diet.
Empower ☐ 	Tere are things Connor can do to help. Eating foods rich in iron can boost his levels and
give him more energy. Red meat, fsh and green leafy vegetables all contain iron. Some
cereals have iron added to them too. Increasing these foods will help Connor feel better
and help reduce the chance of him becoming anaemic again. Do you think you could adjust
the meals you make to increase iron rich foods?
Options ☐ 	You could try increasing dietary iron alone…
Recommend ☐ …but my suggestion would be to give Connor a course of iron to give his stores a boost and
get him feeling better quicker. How does that sound? Is Connor able to swallow tablets?
Specifcs ☐ 	I would suggest a 3-month course of iron called ferrous sulfate. He would need to take 1 ×
200 mg tablet twice a day. Tese tablets can cause nausea and bowel upset – either consti-
pation or diarrhoea, and do tend to turn poo black. However, most people tolerate them
pretty well. Having vitamin C with the tablet, for example drinking a cup of orange juice,
helps the iron absorb and can reduce any side efects. What are your thoughts?
Future ☐ 	Great, we will need to repeat his blood test in 4 weeks to check he is responding and will
check the test again at the end of the 3-month course.
Safety Net ☐ 	If Connor has side efects from the tablets or develops new symptoms, particularly bleeding,
bruising, weight loss, fever, sweats or bowel problems, please call me straight away.
➠ 258
Haematology – 4

-- 273 of 575 --

➠ 259	
Patient’s Story 	Anaemia
Doctor’s notes Connor McGowen, 9 years. Telephone consultation with mum, Shona McGowen.
Previous consultation 4 weeks ago by locum GP – mum noticed looks a little pale and
seems lethargic. Connor reporting feeling tired. No other symptoms other than occasional
abdominal cramps, usually when has been a little constipated. No red fags. Mum worried
about coeliac disease due to family history, (paternal cousin and grandfather) agree bloods
then review.
Bloods show mild iron-defciency anaemia. Normal coeliac screen, TFTs, B12 and folate.
How to act 	Relaxed.
PC 	‘Hi. I was hoping to discuss Connor’s recent blood test results.’
History 	Connor has been more lethargic and tired for the last couple of months. He has been lying
on the sofa afer school and doesn’t feel like going out to play football. You think he looks
pale but is otherwise okay. He does get occasional abdominal pain but this usually coincides
with when he becomes a little constipated. He doesn’t eat a lot of fruit and vegetables. He
prefers to eat chips and pizza if he has a choice. He has not sufered any weight loss, sweats,
fevers, bruising, diarrhoea or signifcant abdominal pain. No blood loss from anywhere.
You were anaemic during pregnancy but no other family history of blood problems.
Social 	Connor generally enjoys school and plays for a football team. He has had less energy and
has been less enthusiastic about going to football training. Connor’s dad is a builder and
works long hours. You work in a supermarket, long hours too, so it is ofen tempting to
make quick meals like pizza rather than cooking lots of meat and vegetable meals. You feel
you should make more of an efort with the family’s diet. You could pick up some healthier
ingredients at work. Perhaps you could encourage Connor to cook with you.
ICE 	You aren’t sure why Connor has been so tired but wonder about coeliac disease as his
paternal grandfather and cousin have this. You just wish to discuss the results though aren’t
impatient regarding this and are happy to discuss the background with the doctor.
You have heard of anaemia – you had this whilst you were pregnant with Connor and took
iron tablets for a month or two. You are happy for Connor to try tablets. You didn’t have
any problems with them when you took them and you’d like him to be back to normal as
soon as possible.
Haematology – 4

-- 274 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Anaemia
Haemoglobin concentration cut ofs can vary between areas and laboratories but WHO suggest the following
as cut ofs for anaemia in children:1
• 	6 months – 5 years: <110 g/L
• 	5–12 years: <115 g/L
• 	12–14 years: <120 g/L
Iron defciency is most commonly due to inadequate dietary intake. Consider coeliac disease.
B12 and folate defciency tend to cause megaloblastic anaemia. Again, usually dietary; rarely pernicious
anaemia can occur.
Consider inherited anaemias, particularly in certain ethnic groups, e.g. sickle cell, thalassaemia.
Other genetic causes, e.g. sideroblastic anaemia, hereditary spherocytosis, G6PD.
Where there are other abnormalities on the FBC consider conditions afecting the bone marrow such as
leukaemia, secondary cancers or fbrosis.
Acquired haemolytic anaemias can be caused by infections, e.g. malaria, hypersplenism, toxins and auto-
immune conditions.
Treatment
Depends on cause.
For defciencies consult BNF for children as doses vary with age and also whether medication is for
prophylaxis or treatment. Both tablets and liquid forms available. Sytron (sodium feredetate) is a commonly
used oral solution for children unable to swallow tablets.
➠ 260
Haematology – 4

-- 275 of 575 --

➠ 261
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Holly Forsyth 	5 years 	F
PMH 	None
Medications 	None
Allergies 	None
Consultations 	None
Investigations 	None
Household 	Anne Forsyth 	35 years 	F
Paul Forsyth 	35 years 	M
Henry Forsyth 	7 years 	M

-- 276 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Henoch–Schönlein Purpura
Open ☐ 	Meningitis – that must have been very worrying. Please tell me what you noticed this
morning.
History ☐ 	How is Holly in herself right now? Please take me back to the beginning. How did this start?
Have you noticed anything else, for example a temperature? And her appetite?
Impact ☐ 	How has she been in herself over the last few days? Has she been able to go to school and
play with her friends?
ICE ☐ 	You were concerned about meningitis – did you have any other worries about what this
might be?
Curious ☐ 	Have you known anyone with meningitis? Yes – I agree it is a worry, meningitis can be very
serious.
Risk ☐ 	Did Holly have a viral infection, for example a bad sore throat, in the last couple of weeks?
Flags☐ 	Has Holly had any tummy pains or sickness in the last few days? Any diarrhoea? Any blood
in the diarrhoea? Has she had swollen ankles or a pufy face?
O/E ☐ 	May I examine Holly please? Check her temperature and pulse, feel her tummy and both
look at and feel the rash on her legs and arms, examine her knees and test a urine sample.
Tank you.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, Holly had a sore throat 2 weeks ago and got better and has been well since
then, going to school and playing as normal, but this morning you noticed this rash, which
is on her legs, buttocks and arms. Her temperature and pulse are both normal and her
tummy is fne. Both her knees seem a little swollen and her face is a little pufy. Her urine
test shows a little protein but is otherwise normal.
Explanation ☐ I think that Holly has had a reaction to a recent infection, possibly the sore throat, and her
body’s defence system has gone over the top in responding to this, causing infammation
of the blood vessels, which we call vasculitis.
Empathy ☐ 	Tis is a lot to take in and not something you were expecting.
InCludE ☐ 	Tankfully it is much less worrying than meningitis and I am able to tell you what I think
it is and get Holly on the right treatment.
Impression ☐ 	Tis condition is called Henoch–Schönlein purpura, or HSP. It’s named afer the two chil-
dren’s doctors who frst described it and purpura means purple, so describes the colour of
the rash.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of this condition before or known anyone with anything similar? It is fairly
rare, afecting about 1 in 10,000 people each year.
Empower ☐ 	Tankfully most children make a complete recovery. Occasionally, children have a problem
with their kidneys for a few weeks or months but this is usually mild and normally gets
better on its own. I will print you a leafet from patient.info that tells you all about HSP.
Options ☐ 	Holly should stay of school and rest for the next few days, with her feet up, for example
on the sofa. Tis will help the rash on her legs to get better more quickly. Calpol will help
if she is feeling achy or has pain anywhere. Use Calpol rather than ibuprofen, as ibuprofen
can afect the kidneys in HSP.
Future ☐ 	I would like to arrange for Holly to see a children’s doctor today for a blood test and to
confrm that this is HSP. I don’t think Holly will need to stay in. Please contact me again
afer this appointment if you have any questions and so we can discuss what has been said.
Specifcs ☐ 	I will speak to the on-call doctor straight afer this consultation and will phone you on your
mobile with a time to go up to the children’s assessment unit.
Safety net ☐ 	If, over the next few days, Holly becomes unwell, for example develops a fever, or if her legs
or face swell more, or you notice blood in her poo please contact a doctor straight away.
➠ 262
Haematology – 5

-- 277 of 575 --

Patient’s Story 	Henoch–Schönlein Purpura
➠ 263
Doctor’s notes Holly Forsyth, 5 years, accompanied by mum. PMH: none. Medication: none.
How to act 	Concerned.
PC 	‘Holly’s been a bit of it for a few days and now she’s come out in this rash on her legs. I did
the glass test and I’m worried it’s meningitis.’
History 	Holly had a sore throat 2 weeks ago which cleared up. A few days ago, she seemed slightly
under the weather and then this morning, when you were helping her dress, you noticed the
rash. Te rash was on the backs of her legs and her buttocks and on her forearms – symmet-
rical. You checked her temperature, which was normal. In fact, Holly has seemed absolutely
fne in herself today, playing happily with her brother, although you wondered if her face
was a bit pufy.
Social 	You work as a shop assistant at the local Spar, part time. You live with Holly’s dad who is a
refuse collector. Holly has an older brother, Henry. Both children have always been ft and
well and attend the local primary school. Holly was at school yesterday and was fne.
ICE 	You thought the rash looked like a bruise so did the glass test and it did not blanch.
Tis has made you worried about meningitis. You have seen pictures of children who have
lost limbs as a result of this. But Holly is well and you thought children with meningitis
were really poorly.
You hope the doctor will tell you what is wrong and act promptly to give Holly the best
care.
You have brought a urine sample, just in case.
Examination
fndings 	Temperature 37.0 °C. HR 80 bpm regular. Cap refll <2 seconds. Abdomen sof, non-tender
NAD. Knee joints slightly swollen. Urine dipstick – Protein +, Blood +. Otherwise NAD.
Reproduced from Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Second Edition (2019), CRC Press.
With thanks to Emily Obringer.
Haematology – 5

-- 278 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Henoch–Schönlein Purpura1
What is it? 	A systemic vasculitis mainly afecting children <10, especially ages 4–6 years.
Rare in infants and young children. Caucasians more afected than other ethnic groups.
May occur in adolescence and adults – generally more severe and renal problems more likely.
Afects 10–20 children/100,000 population. (GP practice of 10,000 patients would expect to see
1–2 cases per year.)
Aetiology 	Cause unknown – ?mixture of genetic, immune and environmental factors.
Appears seasonal – mainly autumn and winter. May be preceded by infections such as
group A streptococci, Mycoplasma, EBV, Coxsackie virus, hepatitis A and B, parvovirus B19,
Campylobacter, varicella and adenoviruses.
May be triggered by vaccination.
May be associated with solid tumours, especially in adult men.
Presentation 	Mild illness, low-grade fever.
Symmetrical, erythematous macular rash especially back of legs, buttocks, ulnar side of arms.
Macules become purpuric, spreading and coalescing to look like bruises. Ofen raised and just
palpable.
10–40% patients have abdominal pain and vomiting.
Boys may develop scrotal pain or swelling.
Investigations 	Diagnosis may be made on symptoms and typical appearance of rash.
Investigations: U&E, FBC to look for platelet levels + rule out leukaemia, tests for recent
streptococcal infection, IgA levels (usually high in HSP).
Urine dipstick to look for protein, blood.
BP (may be raised).
Stool test for blood in stools.
Skin biopsy if diagnosis uncertain.
Renal biopsy may be considered if renal involvement.
Management 	Painkillers – paracetamol rather than ibuprofen (because of risks of bleeding from kidneys or
gut). Ibuprofen can be used if no renal involvement.
Rest – with legs elevated. Purpura tends to develop in dependent areas.
Steroids – if renal involvement, specialist guidance.
If thought to have been triggered by medication – stop this.
Referral to renal specialist for ?renal biopsy.
Treat BP if raised.
Plasma exchange if very serious complications.
Complications 	Renal involvement in 50% – some may develop nephritis. Can happen up to 6 months afer rash.
GI bleeding – 30% → passing blood in stools. Rarely, can be severe and life threatening.
Orchitis – in 30% boys afected.
Rare but serious:
Brain and nervous system – seizures.
Heart – MI.
Lungs – bleeding into lungs.
Prognosis 	If no renal involvement, full recovery in 4 weeks with no sequelae.
1/10 have serious renal complications, may lead to renal failure.
HSP may recur within 6 months, especially if kidneys were involved.
➠ 264
Haematology – 5

-- 279 of 575 --

➠ 265	
Extra Notes 	Haematology
Assessing capacity – see also Extra Notes, Chapter 16
To do this you need to ensure that the patient:
1. Understands the information.
2. Is able to remember the information long enough to make a decision.
3. Is able to weigh up the risks and repeat these to the doctor.
4. Is able to communicate his/her decision.
If a patient has capacity, is aware of risk to life and all the risks of not following advice and you cannot
persuade them, you must respect the patient’s autonomy. You should ask about involving family members
and consider how else you can help the patient, including end-of-life and DNACPR discussions. However,
you should not simply wash your hands of the patient because they have ignored your advice. Tink about
ways you can still help the patient, keep them safe and allow them the opportunity to change their mind.
Patients may refuse to go to hospital for many reasons. Teir reason should be explored in detail and the
doctor should give an explanation of what they expect will happen in the hospital.
Caring for others or even dogs/cats is a common reason to refuse hospital admission. Know your local
emergency care team. Tere are also organisations that can help with pets, e.g. Dogs Trust.
Apixaban for DVT and PE1
DVT and PE: 10 mg BD for 7 days then 5 mg BD.
Prevention of recurrent VTE: 2.5 mg BD (afer 6 months treatment).
For people with renal impairment:
• 	If creatinine clearance is 15 – 29 mL/min:
• 	VTE – use apixaban with caution (as above).
• 	Non-valvular AF – reduce dose to 2.5 mg twice daily. Same reduced dose if serum creatinine is ≥133
μmol/L and patient ≥80 years or weighs ≤60 kg.
• 	Do not prescribe apixaban if creatinine clearance (CrCl) <15 mL/minute.
Duration of treatment
Treatment of DVT and PE – assess presence of transient risk factors (for example recent surgery, trauma
and immobilisation), but minimum of 3 months. Patients will usually be followed up in a VTE clinic who
will advise regarding duration of treatment.
Advice for people taking apixaban
• 	No need for regular blood tests to monitor, e.g. INR, but still need monitoring, blood tests and review
of treatment:
• 	Renal function and LFT usually once a year, but more ofen if the person becomes ill or has renal
problems.
• 	Review every 3 months – assessment of compliance and adverse efects.
• 	Reiterate the importance of good compliance:
• 	Efect reduces afer 12–24 hours. Missed tablets means no cover!
• 	If surgery needed, may have to stop apixaban treatment temporarily.
• 	Don’t stop treatment abruptly.
• 	Seek medical advice if spontaneous bleeding that does not stop or recurs.
Haematology

-- 280 of 575 --

Adverse effects
Seek immediate medical advice if:
• 	Spontaneous bleeding occurs whilst on apixaban and the bleeding does not stop or recurs.
• 	Sudden severe back pain (which may indicate spontaneous retroperitoneal bleeding).
Drug interactions which can afect the plasma levels of apixaban: see https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/
anticoagulation-oral/management/apixaban/#drug-interactions
➠ 266
Haematology

-- 281 of 575 --

CHAPTER 11 OVERVIEW
Infectious Disease and Travel Health
➠ 267
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Infectious Disease and Travel Health
Learning points in this chapter include:
1 	Recurrent UTI 	‘Renal diseases relevant to
children – recurrent urinary tract
infections’
NICE Guideline CG54. Urinary tract infection
in under 16s: diagnosis and management.
October 2018.
2 	Lyme Disease 	‘Skin infections…Lyme disease’
‘Tick-borne infections including Lyme
disease’
NICE Guideline NG95. Lyme disease.
October 2018.
3 	Viral Illness 	‘Features of the acutely unwell child
including rashes, irritability, breathing
and circulatory signs’
NICE Guideline NG143. Fever in under
5s: assessment and initial management.
November 2019.
4 	Glandular
Fever
‘Multisystem infections – Epstein–Barr
virus’
5 	Altitude
Sickness
‘You should be competent in diagnosing
and managing common and important
conditions related to travel and
infectious disease, while at the same
time knowing what services are
available within your practice and
locality’
‘Travel-related conditions, e.g. altitude
sickness’
‘When prescribing, it is essential to
follow the law and GMC guidance and
to take account of licensing’
Prevention, diagnosis and management of
altitude sickness
HACE, HAPE
Prescribing unlicensed medicines

-- 282 of 575 --

CHAPTER 11 REFERENCES
Recurrent UTI
1. 	NICE Guideline CG54. Urinary tract infection in under 16s: diagnosis and management. Oct 2018.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG143. Fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management. Nov 2019.
Lyme Disease
1. 	https://patient.info/doctor/lyme-disease-pro. Aug 2016.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG95. Lyme disease. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng95. Oct 2018.
Useful Resource
https://www.lymediseaseaction.org.uk/about-ticks/tick-removal/
Viral Illness
1. 	NICE Guideline NG143. Fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management. Nov 2019.
Glandular Fever
1. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/glandular-fever-infectious-mononucleosis. May 2021.
Useful Resource
https://patient.info/ears-nose-throat-mouth/sore-throat-2/glandular-fever-infectious-mononucleosis#nav-5. Jan 2021.
Altitude Sickness
1. 	https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/altitude-sickness/ Mar 2020.
2. 	RCGP curriculum – Improving Quality, Safety and Prescribing.
3. 	GMC. Good Practice in Prescribing and Managing Medicines and Devices. Apr 2021.
4. 	Moore J.K., Ladbrook M., Goodyer L., Dallimore J. Te provision of prescription-only medicines for use on
UK-based overseas expeditions. Wilderness Environ Med 2017; 28: 219–24.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 268
Infectious Disease and Travel Health

-- 283 of 575 --

➠ 269
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Kalpesh Khan 	6 years 	M
PMH 	Urinary tract infection 6 weeks ago – E. coli, fully sensitive
Urinary tract infection 6 months ago – E. coli, fully sensitive
Medications 	No current medication.
Past medication – two courses of trimethoprim.
Allergies 	No information.
Consultations 	Last appointment 2 days ago:
Attended with mum. Temperature 37.9 °C, lower abdominal pain,
dysuria, frequency and urgency.
Abdominal examination – suprapubic tenderness, abdomen sof,
no masses. No loin pains.
Urine dip: protein +, blood +, leucocytes ++, nitrites ++.
MSU sent. Trimethoprim prescription given.
Weight 20 kg
Investigations 	MSU result from 2 days ago – E. coli, resistant to amoxicillin and
trimethoprim, sensitive to nitrofurantoin and cefalosporin.
Household 	Asaf Khan 	43 years 	M
Yasmin Khan 	41 years 	F
Ayub Khan 	7 years 	M
Raja Khan 	3 years 	M
Sabeen Khan 	2 years 	F

-- 284 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Recurrent UTI
Open ☐ 	I’m sorry to hear that Kalpesh is no better. Could you tell me what has been happening over
the last couple of days? How is he now? What is he doing at present?
History ☐ 	I see he has had two other urine infections in the past 6 months. In between his infections
was he well? Has he had any other medical problems? Does he have any allergies? Is there
any family history of kidney problems?
ICE ☐ 	What is going through your mind about this? Have you had any thoughts about what you
would like to happen next? Is anything particularly worrying you?
Curious ☐ 	What is your experience of septicaemia? I’m sorry to hear that.
Empathy ☐ 	Infections must be worrying given your experience with your father.
Flags ☐ 	What is Kalpesh’s temperature at present? Is he drinking well? When did he last pass urine?
Do you know if his urine stream is normal? Have you seen any blood? Is he complaining
of tummy or back pain? Has he vomited? Is he breathing normally? Is he drowsy or con-
centrating on the TV?
Risk ☐ 	Has he been growing and developing well? Were there any problems during your preg-
nancy? Does he ever struggle to open his bowels? Has he had any tests at the hospital?
InCludE ☐ 	So you believe Kalpesh has a urine infection but recognise that frequent urine infections
in children aren’t common. You are worried about septicaemia as this infection hasn’t gone
away.
Impression ☐ 	Te laboratory sample confrms another urine infection, but unfortunately this one isn’t
sensitive to trimethoprim, which explains why he hasn’t improved. Te good news is that
the laboratory has told us that another antibiotic should work.
InCludE ☐ 	From your description of Kalpesh it doesn’t sound like he has septicaemia, but I agree this
is a rare possibility if the infection isn’t treated.
Experience ☐ 	Has another doctor talked to you about what tests we recommend with recurrent urine
infections? Please tell me what you have read.
Explanation ☐ You are correct. Recurrent water infections in children aren’t that common, and usually
need investigation. However, they do usually respond to antibiotic medicines.
Options ☐ 	Today I could either see Kalpesh in the surgery, if you feel he needs review, or send you a
prescription for nitrofurantoin antibiotic which should kill the bacteria. Which would you
prefer? Okay, I will do a prescription for nitrofurantoin. Based on Monday’s weight he will
need 15 mg 4 times a day.
Future ☐ 	As Kalpesh has now had three confrmed infections, I would like to refer him to see a spe-
cialist, would that be okay? May I order an urgent ultrasound scan to look at his kidneys
and bladder, which will be done within 6 weeks? It is likely the specialist will want to do
some other tests such as a special test that checks that his bladder empties properly and that
urine doesn’t fow back up into the tubes towards the kidneys, because this is one cause of
recurrent urine infection in children.
Safety net ☐ 	Keep an eye on how much urine he is passing. If he passes signifcantly less urine or you
feel he is more unwell, don’t hesitate to seek advice from a doctor straight away. I will get
on with the referral to the specialist; you should receive an appointment letter within the
next couple of weeks but please let the practice secretary know if this does not happen.
Specifcs ☐ 	If Kalpesh gets any worse, please give us a ring straight away. I would expect him to improve
within 48 hours, so if he is no better please let me know. Should you become worried in
the evening, night or weekend you can phone 111 for advice. Are you happy with the plan?
Tank you.
➠ 270
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 1

-- 285 of 575 --

➠ 271
Patient’s Story 	Recurrent UTI
Doctor’s notes Kalpesh Khan, 6 years. PMH: two UTIs – E. coli, fully sensitive in past 6 months and further
UTI confrmed on MSU, resistant to trimethoprim given.
How to act 	Concerned.
PC 	‘Hi Doctor, thanks for calling. I’m a bit worried about Kalpesh. He isn’t responding to the
antibiotics this time.’
History 	You attended the surgery 2 days ago when Kalpesh had symptoms of a urinary tract infec-
tion. You were given antibiotics by the doctor and told to phone back if he isn’t improving.
Unfortunately, this time he hasn’t improved with trimethoprim. Tis is his third urinary
tract infection in the last 6 months. Kalpesh was born at term following a normal pregnancy.
He has been developing normally and is getting on well at school. He is otherwise ft and
well (including since his last infection). He opens his bowels daily. Currently Kalpesh is
lying on the sofa watching TV but is alert and concentrating. He is still having a low-grade
fever intermittently, has lower tummy pain and dysuria. His fever is 37.2 °C at present afer
paracetamol and you plan to give him some ibuprofen. He is eating and drinking okay and
passing urine every 2–3 hours. You have seen no blood and he has not complained of back
pain. You have kept him of school for the last couple of days. Tere is no family history.
He has no allergies.
Social 	You are a married full-time mum and have three other children. Tey are all well. Kalpesh’s
father is a mechanic during the day and works as a taxi driver in the evenings, so works
long hours.
ICE 	You are worried that the antibiotics aren’t working. You don’t want Kalpesh to become really
unwell. You are aware that infections can be serious – your father died of sepsis.
‘I just don’t want this to become a septicaemia.’
You have done some research and wonder if Kalpesh needs further tests. He has only had
urine samples sent to date.
‘I’ve read about tests he may need.’ Reading included an ultrasound scan and a kidney scan
but this is all you understand.
You would like to know what happens next. You are happy to accept antibiotics over the
phone or an appointment at the surgery to check Kalpesh over. If given the option, and the
doctor has clearly explained the problem and future plan, accept antibiotics over the phone.
You would like Kalpesh to be referred.
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 1

-- 286 of 575 --

–
Learning Points 	UTIs in Children
Most common signs and symptoms:
• 	Infants (0–3 months): fever, vomiting, lethargy, irritability.
• 	Other: failure to thrive, poor feeding, jaundice, abdominal pain, haematuria and ofensive urine.
• 	3 months+ (pre-verbal): fever.
• 	Other: abdominal pain, loin tenderness, vomiting, poor feeding, lethargy, irritability, haematuria,
ofensive urine, failure to thrive.
• 	3 months+ (verbal): frequency, dysuria, dysfunctional voiding, changes in continence, abdominal pain,
loin tenderness, fever, malaise, vomiting, haematuria, ofensive urine, cloudy urine.
Management of children with urinary tract infections
Child’s age 	Testing 	Management refer to full guidance
Also refer to NICE guideline N143 Fever in under 5s:
assessment and initial management. November 2019
<3 months 	Send urine for urgent MCS 	Immediate admission to paediatrics for investigation and
intravenous antibiotics in line with NICE Guideline N143
3 months-3
year
Dipstick testing 	−ve nitrites and leucocytes – no antibiotic, no MCS
+ve Leucocytes and/or nitrites – start antibiotics and send
urine for microscopy
>3 years 	‘Dipstick testing for leucocyte
esterase and nitrite is
diagnostically as useful as
microscopy and culture, and
can safely be used.’ 1
+ve nitrite and leucocytes = treat
+ve nitrite, −ve leucocytes = treat and send for culture
−ve nitrite, +ve leucocytes = await MCS unless clinically
UTI – may indicate infection outside urinary tract
−ve nitrite and leucocytes = explore other causes of illness
Send an MSU if: suspected upper UTI (fever >38 oC or loin pain), child <3 years, recurrent UTI, single
positive for leucocytes or nitrites, no improvement afer 48 hours (if sample not sent already)1, child with
intermediate–high risk serious illness,2 or ‘when clinical symptoms and dipstick do not correlate.’1
For antibiotic choice see your local antibiotic guidance and BNF.
Which investigations and should I refer?1 depends on the type of UTI and the child’s age.
Typical UTI (UTI): E. coli responding to treatment/48 hours, no other features of AUTI or RUTI.
Atypical UTI (AUTI): seriously ill,2 poor urine fow, abdominal or bladder mass, raised creatinine, non E.
Coli species, not responding to treatment within 48 hours or septicaemia. Admission ofen required.
Recurrent UTI (RUTI): ≥2 UTIs (one must be upper) or ≥3 lower UTIs.
0–6 months: 	UTI: all require an USS within 6 weeks and if abnormal consider an MCUG.
AUTI: USS during acute infection UNLESS see * below. Also DMSA + MCUG.
RUTI: require urgent (during acute infection) USS,* DSMA + MCUG.
6 months–3 years: UTI: do not require investigation.
AUTI or RUTI: require USS (urgent for AUTI*, <6 weeks for RUTI) + DSMA ± MCUG.
Over 3 years: 	UTI: do not require investigation.
AUTI: urgent USS only UNLESS*.
RUTI: USS within 6 weeks and DSMA 4–6 months afer the infection.
*UNLESS in non-E. coli UTI, responding to antibiotics + no other features of AUTI – USS/6 weeks.
➠ 272
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 1

-- 287 of 575 --

➠ 273
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Paul Haydock 	21 years 	M
PMH 	None
Medications 	None
Allergies 	None
Consultations 	None
Investigations 	None
Household 	Nicola Jones 	21 years 	F
Tomash Komosa 	24 years 	M
Gavin Tompson 	22 years 	M
Tareeq Khan 	23 years 	M

-- 288 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Lyme Disease
Open ☐ 	Yes of course. I’m sure we will be able to treat this. How did you frst notice it?
ICE ☐ 	What’s gone through your mind about the rash? What made your girlfriend think of
ringworm? Did you have any other thoughts? Has anything worried you about this? I’ll
provide my recommendation but was there anything specifc you were hoping for?
Curious ☐ 	Tell me about yourself – what are you doing in your life? And who do you live with?
History ☐ 	How has the rash changed since you frst noticed it? Has it been itchy, sore or even painful?
Flags ☐ 	How have you felt in yourself? Any aches and pains or fatigue? Shortness of breath? Eye
soreness or blurred vision?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you haven’t been too worried yourself about this, but your girlfriend is concerned
she might catch it from you.
Risk ☐ 	Have you been away from home in the last 3–6 weeks? Tell me about your trip to
Scotland – in particular about any activities outdoors such as camping or hiking.
Examination ☐ I’ve had a look at the photo you sent, thank you. Are you able to check your own pulse and
temperature? Tank you, that’s really helpful.
Impression ☐ 	I don’t think this is ringworm, although the rash is similar. I think it may be Lyme disease
which is an infection that may be caused by tick bites.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of Lyme disease or known anyone who has had this? I’m sorry to hear about
your friend’s experience, but that isn’t common. Most people get a rash like yours, rather
than tiredness or other symptoms and the rash soon clears with antibiotics.
Explanation ☐ Lyme disease is caused when you are bitten by a tick that has already been infected with a
bacterial bug. Te bug is passed on in the tick saliva and infects the skin giving this rash
which is called erythema migrans. Erythema means ‘red’ and migrans means ‘spreading’,
so the name describes what the rash does if untreated.
Recommend ☐ Tere is no need to do a blood test because the appearance of the rash is so typical. Are there
any antibiotics you can’t take or are allergic to? Good – I suggest one called doxycycline.
Please take one tablet twice a day for 3 weeks. You may get mild tummy symptoms such as
loss of appetite, nausea or diarrhoea – these are common, ignore them if you can.
InCLudE ☐ 	You mentioned a cream, but that won’t work for this rash – you need to have a course of
antibiotics. I appreciate you were not expecting this? (Pause for response)
Empathy ☐ 	I agree that 3 weeks is a long time and I completely understand your hesitation about anti-
biotics but it’s important that we completely get rid of the bug that’s causing the rash, and
this can take time. May I prescribe the antibiotics for you? Any other thoughts?
Empower ☐ 	If there were 100 people like you starting antibiotics for Lyme disease, about 16 would feel
worse at frst, for example fever, muscle aches and sweating. Tis shows that the immune
system and the antibiotic are working and, if this happens, you should carry on with the
treatment. Tankfully, you can’t infect anyone else, so your girlfriend and others can’t get
the rash from you. Do you have any questions? Avoiding tick bites is the best way to prevent
this from recurring. Although you’ve had the infection, you won’t be immune and can catch
it again if you get bitten. I would recommend that you wear long trousers when you are
walking or working in any places where there may be deer, and always check your skin for
ticks at the end of the day. Tuck your socks into your trousers so the ticks can’t get in. You
can safely remove ticks using fne-pointed tweezers and a steady pull. Te UK-based Lyme
Disease Action website has a video about how to do this.
Future ☐ 	Sometimes symptoms linger following treatment. If all clears up and you feel well when you
complete the antibiotics, there is no need to see me again, however if you have concerns
please let me know.
Safety net ☐ 	If you start to feel very unwell soon, or get a rash like nettle rash, or notice eye, breathing
or nerve problems, please contact a doctor. Also see a doctor if you start to feel tired, weak
or unwell in the next few weeks.
➠ 274
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 2

-- 289 of 575 --

➠ 275
Patient’s Story 	Lyme Disease
Doctor’s notes Paul Haydock, male, 21 years. No PMH, drugs or allergies. No recent consultations.
How to act 	Initially you are unconcerned. You become anxious if Lyme disease/3 weeks of antibiotics
are mentioned
PC 	‘Can I have some cream for this rash on my leg?’ (Demonstrates the rash by showing the
picture or state you have sent a photo.)
History 	Two weeks ago you noticed a red mark on your right leg. Since then, it has grown and
seems to be spreading. Te middle part has improved but it’s growing in a ring. You do not
feel unwell and the rash is not itchy or sore. Tree weeks ago, you went on a feld trip to
Scotland when you were camping in an informal campsite. If asked, you did not notice a
tick bite, nor remove a tick from your skin. You were wearing long trousers when outside
but did not tuck them into your socks.
Social 	You are a geography student at Leeds University in your fnal year. You live with four other
students in a shared house, including your girlfriend Nicola who is a medical student.
‘Nicola thinks it’s ringworm.’
ICE 	Nicola has told you that she thinks this is ringworm and that you should get some cream to
treat it. She is concerned she might catch a fungal infection from you. If the doctor suspects
Lyme disease, you become alarmed. A fellow student got this and had to leave the course
because they became so ill with fatigue. You ask for investigations and become concerned if
the doctor prescribes antibiotics without doing tests. ‘Can I have a blood test or something
to be sure that’s what it is?’ You are shocked at the length of antibiotic course ‘3 weeks! Tat
seems a long time. I thought antibiotics were bad for you.’
O/E 	Temperature 37.0 °C. HR 68 bpm regular. No other skin rashes.
Credit: Shutterstock.
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 2

-- 290 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Lyme Disease
Cause 	Body’s response to infection with spirochaete Borrelia burgdorferi, transmitted from deer ticks.1
Pathophysiology Once bitten by infected tick, there are several possible responses:
• 	Infection cleared by host defences (no symptoms but seropositive).
• 	Direct invasion of the skin causing typical rash, erythema migrans.
• 	Immune response with clinical symptoms, but no rash, e.g. neurological, MSK, etc.1
Epidemiology 	More common in many areas of S. England, Tetford Forest, Lake District, N Yorks. moors
and Scottish Highlands.1 Grassy and wooded areas including gardens and parks.2 Most tick
bites do not transmit Lyme disease – prompt removal of tick reduces risk.2
Incidence 	Estimated 3000 cases per year in the UK. All ages and genders. 15% acquired abroad.1
Presentation 	Erythema migrans. Red rash, increase in size, not itchy, hot or painful. Usually appears 1–4
weeks (range 3 days to 3 months) afer bite. May also get local reaction – usually develops and
recedes within 48 hours of bite, more likely to be hot, itchy and/or painful. Tis is infamma-
tion/infection with common skin pathogen, not Borrelia.2
Consider Lyme disease as possible cause of fever and sweats, swollen glands, malaise, fatigue,
neck pain or stifness, migratory joint or muscle aches and pain, cognitive impairment, such
as memory problems and difculty concentrating (‘brain fog’), headache, paraesthesia.2
Lyme disease is an UNCOMMON cause of: neuro symptoms, e.g. facial palsy or unexplained
cranial nerve palsy, mononeuritis multiplex, rarely encephalitis; infammatory arthritis afect-
ing one or more joints; cardiac problems, e.g. heart block, pericarditis; uveitis or keratitis; or
skin rashes such as acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans or lymphocytoma.2
History 	Ask about activities that might have exposed to ticks and travel to areas of high prevalence.2
Consider possibility even with no clear history of tick exposure.
Investigations 	Diagnose and treat erythema migrans without investigating further:
• 	If suspicious but no rash, ofer ELISA test, treat with antibiotics until results.2
• 	If ELISA positive or equivocal, request immunoblot test and consider antibiotics.
Further details at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng95/chapter/Recommendations
Information for patients 	Lab tests have limitations with false positives and false negatives. If symptoms persist
and tests are negative, other diagnoses will be considered. Symptoms such as tiredness, head-
aches and muscle pain are common and a medical cause may not be found.2
Treatment 	1. Emergency referral if CNS infection, uveitis, cardiac complications.
2. Specialist advice if:
• 	<18, UNLESS single erythema migrans lesion only and no other symptoms.
• 	Adult with focal symptoms (e.g. to infectious diseases, rheumatology, neurology).
3. Lyme disease without focal symptoms (i.e. typical rash only) – no investigations needed.
Treat with antibiotics promptly:
• 	First choice: oral doxycycline – 100 mg BD or 200 mg OD for 21 days.
• 	Alternative: oral amoxicillin 1 g TDS for 21 days.
• 	Second alternative – oral azithromycin 500 mg daily for 17 days.
See https://cks.nice.org.uk/lyme-disease#!scenario for doses for children
Information for patients about treatment
• 	Symptoms may worsen in 15% of patients when they start treatment (e.g. fever, chills, muscle aches) – Jarisch–
Herxheimer reaction due to cytokine release when antibiotics kill large numbers of bacteria. May last hours
or 1–2 days. Unless there is evidence of allergy (e.g. urticaria) should continue the antibiotic.
• 	Use normal remedies for pain and fever, e.g. paracetamol.
If symptoms persist afer treatment, review history and consider other possible causes. Also consider second course
of antibiotics. Ten discussion with national reference laboratory or specialist advice.
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 2	
➠ 276

-- 291 of 575 --

➠ 277
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Jayden Hall 	13 months 	M
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Donna Hall 	29 years 	F
Liam Hall 	6 years 	M
Carly Hall 	4 years 	F

-- 292 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Viral Illness
Open ☐ 	Good morning, can I check who I am speaking to? Please could you confrm Jayden’s date
of birth and address? Great, how can I help? What is Jayden doing at the moment?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had any thoughts about what may be wrong with Jayden and what might need
to be done? How worried are you about Jayden at this moment?
History ☐ 	What is he currently doing now? How long has Jayden been poorly? How high has his tem-
perature been? Has it come down with paracetamol or ibuprofen? Has he been coughing?
Does he have a runny nose? Any diarrhoea or vomiting? Does he seem in pain or distressed?
Has Jayden had any medical problems? Any breathing problems in the past? Any problems
in your pregnancy or around birth? And what support do you have with the children? Do
you work? Is Jayden in contact with anyone who smokes?
Risk ☐ 	Has anyone he spends time with been poorly? Is he up to date with his vaccinations?
Flags ☐ 	Is he eating and drinking okay? Has he been having wet nappies? Have you noticed a rash?
Does he seem to be breathing more quickly than usual? Is he moving around normally for
him? Is he more drowsy?
Sense ☐ 	You seem to have a lot on your plate at the moment; is that right?
SummarICE ☐ 	So Jayden has been unwell for about 24 hours with a fever. You were hoping for a home
visit so I could listen to his chest and prescribe some antibiotics.
Impression ☐ 	From listening to the description of Jayden’s symptoms, it sounds as if he has a viral infec-
tion, but I agree we should have a look at him, especially his ears, and listen to his chest.
Explanation ☐ Usually when a child has a runny nose, cough and high temperature it is due to a viral
infection, particularly if other people in the family have had similar symptoms.
InCludE ☐ 	In these situations, antibiotics don’t help as they won’t treat a viral infection and can actually
make children more poorly by causing side efects like diarrhoea.
Empathy ☐ 	Having an unwell child, especially with a fever, is naturally a worry and it is very under-
standable you would like him checked. If ever you are unsure, calling the GP is the right
thing to do. It must be really difcult having three poorly children at once.
Empower ☐ 	I can also provide you with a useful article called When Should I Worry that is helpful to
parents. Tis provides some useful advice about fevers in children, common childhood
illnesses, worrying symptoms and using medication at home.
Options ☐ 	But it would be really helpful if you could bring Jayden down to the surgery so I can examine
him here and check that he is okay. We have to reserve home visits for housebound patients
so we have time to see more patients, like Jayden, at the surgery. I would be happy to see
him at whatever time you are able to get down, this morning or this afernoon.
Examination ☐ I would like to check his temperature, listen to his breathing and heart, have a look at his
skin, check his ears and inside his mouth and have a feel of his neck and tummy. How does
that sound?
Empower ☐ 	Could you ask a friend or relative to keep an eye on Liam and Carly while you bring Jayden
to the surgery? Or get someone to come with you all to help? Tank you.
Recommend ☐ Meanwhile you can give ibuprofen as well as the paracetamol you have given. Te two are
safely used together and one option is to give them alternately, for example 3 hours afer
the paracetamol you give the ibuprofen, to avoid a fever coming on before the next dose is
due. Do not give each more frequently than the instructions on the box.
Future ☐ 	We have a health visitor at the surgery who is a great resource for support, information and
advice. Tey see all families with young children. May I ask the health visitor to contact
you?
Safety net ☐ 	Please give me a call if Jayden gets any worse in the meantime. If the surgery is closed
please call 111. If he becomes very unwell, for example, if he becomes foppy, his breathing
changes or he develops new symptoms like a rash, you should phone 999. I don’t expect
this to happen. I will see you at the surgery later today.
➠ 278
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 3

-- 293 of 575 --

➠ 279
Patient’s Story 	Viral Illness
Doctor’s notes Jayden Hall, 13 months. PMH: no information.
How to act 	Harassed.
Push the doctor for a home visit. Be delighted if they agree to visit.
If the doctor is insistent that you come to the surgery and suggests options, reluctantly agree
to come down. You could call your mum and ask her to babysit.
PC 	‘Morning Doctor, I was wondering if you could visit. Jayden has a high temperature and is
not well.’
History 	Jayden has had a high temperature on and of for 24 hours. You have an ear thermometer
which has shown temperatures up to 38.6 °C. You have given Jayden paracetamol which has
brought his temperature down but it is creeping back up again and paracetamol isn’t due
for 2 hours. Jayden was coughing all night and kept you awake. You are tired and stressed
this morning as Jayden’s two older siblings (Liam 6 years and Carly 4 years) are of school
with colds, which they have had for a few days. Tankfully they seem to be on the mend.
Jayden has a runny nose and is pulling at his ears. His appetite has reduced but he is still
drinking well. He has had plenty of wet nappies. He has not been sick and doesn’t have
diarrhoea. Jayden is currently playing with his sister in the lounge. You would like a home
visit as you feel Jayden needs looking at, but you feel it will be too much to bring all three
children down to the surgery. You live within walking distance of the surgery. Jayden is up
to date with his vaccinations and there were no concerns during the pregnancy or neonatal
period. He is growing and developing normally.
Social 	You are a single mum. You have a part-time cleaning job. Tis is fairly fexible and you work
when your mother can babysit Jayden whilst the others are at school. Your mother lives
nearby and you have some supportive friends. Jayden’s dad sees him at the weekends.
ICE 	You feel Jayden probably needs antibiotics for a chest infection but aren’t overly concerned
about him. You expect the doctor to visit to examine his chest and give you a prescription
for antibiotics.
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 3

-- 294 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Fever in Under 5s1
Management of children with urinary tract infections
Tis trafc light table should be used in conjunction with the recommendations in the NICE guideline on
fever in under 5s.1
Green – low risk 	Amber – intermediate risk 	Red – high risk
Colour
(of skin, lips
or tongue)
• Normal colour 	• Pallor reported by parent/
carer
• Pale/mottled/ashen/ blue
Activity 	• Responds normally to
social cues
• Content/smiles
• Stays awake or awakens
quickly
• Strong normal cry/not
crying
• Not responding normally
to social cues
• No smile
• Wakes only with
prolonged stimulation
• Decreased activity
• No response to social
cues
• Appears ill to a healthcare
professional
• Does not wake or if roused
does not stay awake
• Weak, high-pitched or
continuous cry
Respiratory 	• Nasal faring
• Tachypnoea:
RR >50 breaths/minute,
age 	6–12 months
RR >40 breaths/minute,
age >12 months
• Oxygen saturation ≤95% in
air
• Crackles in the chest
• Grunting
• Tachypnoea: RR >60
breaths/minute
• Moderate or severe chest
indrawing
Circulation 	• Normal skin and eyes 	• Tachycardia: 	• Reduced skin turgor
and hydration 	• Moist mucous membranes 	>160 beats/minute, age
<12 months
>150 beats/minute, age
12–24 months
>140 beats/minute, age
2–5 years
• CRT ≥3 seconds
• Dry mucous membranes
• Poor feeding in infants
• Reduced urine output
Other 	• None of the amber or red
symptoms or signs
• Age 3–6 months,
temperature ≥39°C
• Fever for ≥5 days
• Rigors
• Swelling of a limb or joint
• Non-weight-bearing limb/
not using an extremity
• Age <3 months,
temperature ≥38°C*
• Non-blanching rash
• Bulging fontanelle
• Neck stiffness
• Status epilepticus
• Focal neurological signs
• Focal seizures
CRT, capillary refll time; RR, respiratory rate.
*Some vaccinations have been found to induce fever in children aged under 3 months.
© NICE 2019. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights. Table reproduced with kind permission from NICE.
Please remember that guidelines are constantly updated. Always refer to the latest guidance and remember
that information from NICE is only applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 280
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 3

-- 295 of 575 --

➠ 281
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Daisy Atherton 	18 years 	F
PMH 	None
Medications 	None
Allergies 	None
Consultations 	1 week ago ‘Sore throat and tiredness for 2 weeks. O/E temperature
38.0 °C. Sats normal. RR normal. Troat – purulent tonsils. Some
cervical glands. FeverPAIN 3: probable viral tonsillitis. Troat
swab taken. Bloods for EBV. Use NSAIDs and paracetamol. See
if not settling, treat with antibiotics if throat swab positive’.
Investigations 	Troat swab – no growth.
EBV – positive. Blood flm done – many atypical lymphocytes.
Confrms diagnosis of GF.
Household 	Henry Atherton 	46 years 	M
Mary Atherton 	44 years 	F
Jack Atherton 	16 years 	M
Daisy has given her written consent for you to discuss her health with her mother.

-- 296 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Glandular Fever
Open ☐ 	Hello Mrs Atherton. I’m sorry to hear about Daisy. How is she now? I’m sorry to hear she’s
still tired and unwell.
ICE ☐ 	Please tell me what concerned you about the consultation with the practice nurse?
Empathy ☐ 	I’m sorry you felt disappointed and let down. Let’s see if I can help address this and your
concerns about Daisy’s illness.
History ☐ 	Please could you tell me about the illness from the beginning.
Impact ☐ 	Tell me about Daisy – I gather she’s at school. How is this afecting her studies? And what
else does she do as well as her schoolwork, for example sports or hobbies? What about
socially? And family life?
Risk ☐ 	Was Daisy in close physical contact with anyone who has, or has recently had, GF? For
example, a boyfriend or girlfriend?
Flags ☐ 	And has she had any tummy pain?
Empathy ☐ 	She sounds very sporty. It must be very difcult for you seeing her so tired – and a worry.
Sense ☐ 	I sense you are very concerned about her.
Experience ☐ 	Have you known anyone else with GF?
Curious ☐ 	Tell me more about your friend’s experience of GF.
ICE ☐ 	And what else, if anything, do you know about GF? You mentioned the nurse said it was
a virus – what did this make you think? Now you know it’s GF, what worries do you have?
And as well as discussing Daisy’s health, is there anything else you were hoping I might be
able to do today?
SummarICE ☐ 	You are concerned that Daisy has GF which you think could have been diagnosed and
treated earlier, and that the illness will afect her schoolwork, risk her not getting the grades
she needs and her place at University.
Impression ☐ 	Mrs Atherton, you are right that the blood tests confrm GF. Te test for the EBV, which
causes GF, is positive – the virus is present.
Explanation ☐ A second blood test we did shows that some of her white blood cells have reacted to the
virus – this means that they are actively working to fght the infection and kill the virus.
So, the nurse was in fact right when she said that this was a viral illness – but it is a specifc
viral illness rather than a more general one that we can’t name.
InCludE ☐ 	Our nurses are well trained to consult with patients with illnesses such as GF and if you
had seen a GP, I’m sure the outcome of the consultation would have been no diferent. As
with other viruses, there is no specifc treatment.
Options ☐ 	Tere is probably no need to do any further tests, although if Daisy’s skin tone becomes
yellow, like jaundice, please arrange an appointment so we can examine her and arrange a
blood test to check how her liver is doing because GF can cause a transient infammation
of the liver.
Specifcs ☐ 	Taking paracetamol and ibuprofen will help Daisy’s symptoms and her energy levels should
start to improve gradually. Tere is no need for her to stay of school, but she should pace
herself, resting when she is tired. Tere are no special precautions for home – her brother
is not at risk. She should, however, avoid saliva contact or kissing as this could spread the
virus to others. She should also avoid contact sports such as rugby for at least 4 weeks, if
possible 8 weeks, from the start of the illness – this is because an organ in her tummy called
the spleen may be enlarged and could be vulnerable in a tackle. She should be fne to be a
bridesmaid but should avoid alcohol as this may afect her more than usual.
Future ☐ 	Daisy should be back to normal within a few weeks, but if you and the school feel that her
exam performance is afected because of tiredness or because she can’t revise properly, let
me know and I would be happy to write a letter of support.
Safety net ☐ 	If Daisy’s tiredness is not gradually improving over the next couple of weeks, please come
back. It’s not likely, but if she gets a bad tummy pain at any time, please contact a doctor
straight away.
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 4	
➠ 282

-- 297 of 575 --

➠ 283
Patient’s Story 	Glandular Fever
Doctor’s notes Daisy Atherton, 18 years. Consultation with the nurse practitioner 1 week ago. ‘Sore throat
and tiredness for 2 weeks. Temperature 38.0 °C. Sats normal. RR normal. Troat – purulent
tonsils. Some cervical glands. FeverPAIN 3: probable viral tonsillitis. Troat swab taken.
Bloods for EBV and flm. Use NSAIDs and paracetamol. See if not settling, treat with anti-
biotics if throat swab positive’.
Results 	Troat swab – no growth.
Monospot – positive. Blood flm – many atypical lymphocytes. Confrms
diagnosis of GF.
How to act 	You are Mary Atherton, the mother of Daisy Atherton. You are annoyed at not getting a GP
appointment for Daisy last week and feel you have been fobbed of by the nurse. If the doc-
tor today listens to you and appears to accept your concerns, you become more reasonable.
PC 	‘I brought Daisy to see the nurse practitioner last week and she told us she “just had a virus”
I’ve had a phone call today to tell me it’s glandular fever!’
History 	Daisy had been feeling tired with a sore throat for the last 2 weeks. You wanted an appoint-
ment with the doctor but could not get one and had to see the nurse practitioner. She
examined Daisy and took a blood test and throat swab and told you both it was probably
just a virus. She suggested paracetamol, ibuprofen and fuids. You were not confdent in
her diagnosis. Now you have been told Daisy has GF.
Social 	Daisy and her brother attend the local comprehensive school. Daisy has her A-levels in a
few weeks and her older brother has his GCSEs soon. Daisy is a keen member of the local
girls’ rugby team and plans to study sport and exercise medicine at University – she needs
good grades to achieve her place.
You are an accountant and your husband is a lawyer.
It’s your niece’s wedding in 2 weeks’ time and Daisy is looking forward to being a bridesmaid.
ICE 	Why couldn’t I see a doctor?
We were told it was just a virus, but it’s not, it’s GF (false health belief).
Your friend’s daughter had GF at a similar age and this was a lengthy and protracted illness
that made her ill for months.
Will her A-level grades sufer – she’s been too tired to revise.
Will her brother catch it?
Can she still do sport?
What about the wedding? Can she still be a bridesmaid?
What precautions should we take at home?
How long will this last?
If the doctor mentions ‘atypical lymphocytes/white cells’ you become concerned that it
might be leukaemia. A friend’s son had this and was very ill, although in remission at the
moment.
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 4

-- 298 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Glandular Fever1
When to suspect
• 	Fever.
• 	Lymphadenopathy – almost all, especially posterior cervical. Nodes mildly tender and mobile.
• 	Sore throat:
• 	Usually severe. 	• 	‘White wash’ exudate.
• 	Tonsillar enlargement – may 	• 	Palatal petechiae – 1–2 mm diameter, crops
meet in mid-line. 	last 3–4 days.
• 	Or sore throat that fails to improve or becomes worse. Can be difcult to distinguish from other types
of sore throat especially streptococcal.
• 	Other features – prodromal malaise, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, non-specifc rash, jaundice.
• 	Most common 15–24 years.
• 	People >40 – rare. Atypical presentation, e.g. fever >2 weeks, jaundice (20%) but ofen no sore throat or
lymphadenopathy.
• 	Children <3 – usually no symptoms, or symptoms of normal childhood viral illness.
Investigations
1. Children >12 and immunocompetent adults – FBC, white cell diferential, monospot (week 2):
• 	Likely to be GF if relative lymphocytosis or >20% reactive or atypical lymphocytes.
• 	If monospot negative, repeat in 5–7 days if clinically indicated.
• 	If rapid diagnosis needed, send blood for EBV serology.
2. Children <12 and immunocompromised of any age:
• 	Serology for EBV if ill >7 days.
• 	If two monospot negative and immunocompromised or pregnant, consider testing for CMV, toxo-
plasmosis and HIV – if at risk.
3. LFTs – AST and ALT may be 2–3 × normal.
Differential diagnosis
• 	Sore throat – streptococcal BUT less fatigue, no hepatosplenomegaly, anterior and submandibular
lymphadenopathy.
• 	Other causes of lymphadenopathy:
• 	Painful – local infection or infammation.
• 	Painless progressive – metastatic solid tumour or lymphoma.
• 	Leukaemia – but rarely presents with lymphadenopathy.
• 	GF-like illness with atypical lymphocytes:
• 	CMV – splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, negative monospot. Sore throat and lymph node enlargement
rare.
• 	Toxoplasmosis – hepatosplenomegaly but mild lymphocytosis.
• 	Also consider: acute viral hepatitis, primary HIV, rubella, roseola, mumps, HSV-1.
Management (for most patients, but see NICE guidelines1 for indications for hospital admission)
• 	Paracetamol, ibuprofen to reduce fever and pain. No evidence for steroids.
• 	Explain symptoms will last 2–4 weeks. Tiredness common – last symptom to go.
• 	School/work exclusion unnecessary but avoid kissing or saliva contact.
• 	Return to normal activities but tailor these to tiredness.
• 	Avoid contact/collision sports or heavy lifing for frst month.
➠ 284
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 4

-- 299 of 575 --

➠ 285
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Warren Edwards 	56 years 	M
PMH 	None
Medications 	None
Allergies 	None
Consultations 	6 months ago – Well Man check with PN. Height 175 cm. Weight
110 kg. BMI 35.9. BP 152/83.
DNA blood test appointment and no consultation since then.
Investigations 	None
Household 	None

-- 300 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Altitude Sickness
Open ☐ 	A trek – that sounds exciting. Where are you going and when? And what’s made you ask for
Diamox? Are you able to tell me how high the trek goes? 5500 metres – that’s really high.
History ☐ 	You are right to seek advice early – have you seen our practice nurse to see if you need any
immunisations and for other health issues?
ICE ☐ 	Apart from altitude sickness, do you have any other concerns? You asked for a prescription for
Diamox – is there anything else you were hoping for from me today?
Social ☐ 	Tell me about you. Which hobbies and what exercise do you enjoy? What do you do at work and
who is at home? I’m sorry to hear about your marriage.
Flags ☐ 	What physical preparation have you done to get ft?
Sense ☐ 	You seem a little hesitant about your ability to do the trek – how are you feeling about the trek now?
Curious ☐ 	I’m curious about why you decided to go on this trek when you don’t generally exercise.
Empathy ☐ 	I’m sorry to hear about your dad – it sounds like the hospice took good care of him, but you miss
him a lot.
Experience ☐ 	Have you experienced altitude sickness in the past? That must have been very unpleas-
ant – although it doesn’t always follow that having had it once you will get it again.
Examination ☐ How has your weight been over the last 6 months? Do you happen to have a BP machine?
Impression ☐ 	My impression is that you are a bit less keen on the trek now than when you signed up and that
you are more conscious about your health.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you came to ask for Diamox to take when trekking to Everest base camp. I have to
tell you that this medication is not licensed for GPs in the UK to prescribe for altitude sickness and
so unfortunately, I can’t. You may, however, be able to get it at a local travel health clinic. Tere are
some aspects of your health that concern me more than the risk of altitude sickness, particularly
if you plan to go ahead with the trek. Your weight today is higher than it was 6 months ago, so
your BMI is now >35. Tis is much higher than it should be and puts you at risk of diabetes, heart
disease and other illnesses. Your BP was also raised at your last visit, so it may be that your BP is
running a little high. Tese factors would put you at risk of developing problems on a trek and
healthcare is not easy to come by in remote areas of Nepal, so this would be a risk.
Explanation ☐ 	Altitude sickness can afect anyone when they go above 2500 metres, particularly if the ascent is
rapid. Having time to acclimatise as you gain height is important and you should check if your
trek builds in rest days and days when you adjust to the height by climbing higher then sleeping
at lower altitudes. Symptoms of altitude sickness include tiredness, headache, breathlessness
and confusion. If you start to get symptoms, you must tell someone. Te only real cure is to
descend. Some people think that Diamox is useful, but others think that it masks the symptoms
and may make things worse. As well as altitude, you also need to think about immunisations
such as tetanus, diphtheria, polio, typhoid and Hep A. Dengue fever is also a problem at lower
altitudes – this is transmitted by mosquitoes and there is no immunisation or cure. Ensure that
your arms and legs are well covered between dusk and dawn and use a mosquito repellent con-
taining DEET.
Options ☐ 	My suggestion would be that we arrange some blood tests to assess your general health and get
your BP re-checked, how does that sound? Our nurse also runs a travel clinic and would be able
to advise about immunisations for Nepal and other travel advice.
Empathy ☐ 	Tis has come as a surprise – you were hoping for a prescription rather than advice about your
general health.
Empower ☐ 	You have many months before the trek – it’s a really good chance to lose some weight and get
ft – that way you would improve your general health as well as being able to raise money and
help the hospice.
InCLudE ☐ 	How do you think you could improve your ftness? Regular walking and jogging sounds good
and cycling to work would be excellent exercise and better for the planet.
Future ☐ 	If your BP continues to be raised, or there is a problem with any of the blood tests, we might
need to see you soon to talk about blood pressure monitoring at home and consider medication.
Specifcs ☐ 	Otherwise, shall we see you in 3 months to see how you are doing with your general ftness and
weight?
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 5	
➠ 286

-- 301 of 575 --

➠ 287
Patient’s Story 	Altitude Sickness
Doctor’s notes Warren Edwards, 56 years. PMH: drugs, allergies. Household: none.
6 months ago – Well Man check with PN. Height 175 cm. Weight 110 kg. BMI 35.9. BP
152/83.
DNA blood test appointment and no consultation since then.
How to act 	Initially you are confdent and self-assured. If the doctor steers the consultation towards
your general health, you keep coming back to the request for Diamox. You will come to
see the practice nurse and will come to the travel clinic, if ofered, but you do want to get
an answer today about Diamox.
PC 	‘I’m going on a trek next year. Will I be able to have some Diamox for altitude sickness?’
History 	You have signed up for a 2-week charity trek next year, going to Everest base camp to raise
money for the local hospice, St Anne’s. Your father died there last year. You miss him a lot
and would like to do something to support the hospice. You have just received the prelim-
inary trip notes from the organisers and it mentions the risk of altitude sickness and says
to ask your GP if you will be able to have a prescription for this. When you were a student,
you went to Peru on a trek and got sick with the altitude and had to be brought down by
porters, which was embarrassing. You don’t want this to happen again.
Social 	You are divorced and live alone. You work in an ofce and are going on the trek with some
friends at work, who are all younger than you and are keen runners and cyclists. At the
time you were persuaded to join in, you thought it would be good fun and an amazing
adventure – as well as raising money. You will fy to Kathmandu in Nepal frst, then fy to
the mountains. Te trek goes as high as 5550 metres and the trip notes say that 7 nights are
spent sleeping above 2500 metres (where altitude sickness may occur).
At the Well Man check 6 months ago, you were told that you were obese and that you should
lose some weight. You have not managed to do so. You put of coming back for blood tests
and did not have your BP re-checked as suggested by the nurse.
Since the divorce, you rely on takeaways and ready meals from the supermarket. You enjoy
the TV in the evening and do not currently do any exercise at all. ‘ I don’t have time for
gyms and all that.’ You do not smoke and drink around 14 units per week.
ICE 	Deep down you are anxious about the trek, as you are the oldest person in the group and
the least ft by a long way, but you don’t want to pull out now and lose face.
You think you might be able to start regular walking and jogging and perhaps cycle to work.
Examination 	Weight 112 kg. BP 160/110. BMI 36.5. If done remotely, able to tell the GP you are now
112 kg but you don’t have your own BP machine.
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 5

-- 302 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Altitude Sickness
Altitude sickness (also called acute mountain sickness – AMS)1
Symptoms 	Headache, dizziness, tiredness, SOB, loss of appetite – usually worse at night. Judgement may be
afected.
When? 	6–24 hours afer reaching heights >2500 m.
Who? 	Anyone – regardless of age, gender, ftness.
Previous history of altitude sickness is not a predictor of getting it again.
Prevention 	Ascend slowly above 2500 m (300–500 m per day only). Have rest days.
Eat light diet, high calories, plenty of fuids, avoid alcohol and smoking.
Plan ahead 	Consider travelling with acetazolamide (unlicensed), paracetamol/ibuprofen for headaches,
promethazine for nausea.
Treatment 	Stop and rest. Do not ascend for 24–48 hours. Treat symptoms with analgesia/ antisickness. If
no better afer 24 hours, descend – at least 500 m.
Complications 	HACE (high altitude cerebral oedema). Above symptoms + confusion, disorientation, hallucina-
tions. Lack of insight into being ill. Fatal if not treated. Rx descend, dexamethasone, bottled O2.
HAPE (high altitude pulmonary oedema). Cough, dyspnoea, chest tightness. Fatal if not treated.
Rx descend, nifedipine, bottled O2.
Prescribing unlicensed medicines
‘When prescribing, it is essential to follow the law and GMC guidance and to take account of licensing and local
prescribing guidance as well as other relevant regulations.’2
Unlicensed medicine = medicines that are used outside the terms of their UK licence or which have no licence
for use in the UK.3
When can you prescribe unlicensed medicines?3
• 	No suitable licensed medicine available in the UK (e.g. child patient where only licensed medication is for an
adult, or the licensed medicine would not meet the needs of a particular child but a medicine licensed for an
adult would do so).
• 	Te dosage specifed for a licensed medicine would not meet the patient’s needs.
• 	Patient needs a formulation not specifed in the licence.
• 	Lack of availability of a suitably licensed medicine, e.g. temporary shortage.
• 	As part of a properly licensed research project.
• 	Due to a serious risk to public health, MHRA has temporarily authorised the sale/supply of a treatment or
vaccine.
You must:3
• 	Be satisfed that there is enough evidence or experience to be sure it works and is safe.
• 	Take personal responsibility for prescribing, monitoring and follow-up OR ensure other suitable arrangements.
• 	Make clear, accurate, legible records of what you have prescribed and why.
• 	Explain to patients that you propose to prescribe of licence in a way that they can understand and so that
they can make an informed choice.
Expedition medicines4
Some GPs may agree to prescribe medicines within their area of expertise, e.g. antibiotics and pain relief, to
patients going on expeditions. If you do decide to do this it should be clearly documented on the prescriptions what
the indications are and any follow-up/blood tests which would be required. Te medicines should be prescribed
as a private prescription. Be careful not to prescribe medications you are unfamiliar with, advise patients to see a
travel/expedition clinic instead or take advice from an expert before prescribing.
➠ 288
Infectious Disease and Travel Health – 5

-- 303 of 575 --

CHAPTER 12 OVERVIEW
Kidney and Urology
➠ 289
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Kidney and Urology
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Acute Kidney
Injury
‘Identify and manage AKI, including
taking early action, such as stopping
medications, to reduce the risk of AKI’
‘.. a signifcant proportion of AKI starts
in the community so GPs have a key
role in its early identifcation and
management’
NICE Guideline NG148. Acute kidney
injury: prevention, detection and
management. December 2019
2 	Chronic Kidney
Disease
‘Common and important conditions…
CKD including causes, classifcation,
management, monitoring and
indications for referral’
NICE Guideline CG182. Chronic
kidney disease in adults: assessment
and management. January 2015
3 	PSA Test Result 	‘IPSS to assess LUTS’
‘Prostatic carcinoma’
Bladder outfow obstruction
PSA levels
4 	Prostatitis 	‘Prostatic problems such as acute and
chronic prostatitis’
Acute and chronic prostatitis
5 	Overactive
Bladder
‘Overactive bladder syndrome’ 	Overactive bladder management
Extra
Notes
UTI in Men and
Haematuria
Erectile
Dysfunction
Benign Prostatic
Hypertrophy
‘Urinary tract infections in children and
in adults’
‘Haematuria’
‘Debate around the role of the PSA
blood test as a screening test for
prostate cancer’
UTI in men
Haematuria
Erectile dysfunction
BPH
PSA screening

-- 304 of 575 --

CHAPTER 12 REFERENCES
Acute Kidney Injury
1. 	NICE Guideline NG148. Acute kidney injury: prevention, detection and management. Dec 2019.
2. 	https://ihub.scot/media/1401/20180424-web-medicine-sick-day-rules-patient-leafet-web-v20.pdf. Apr 2018.
Chronic Kidney Disease
1. 	NICE Guideline CG182. Chronic kidney disease in adults: assessment and management. Jan 2015.
2. 	NICE Guideline CG181. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modifcation.
Sep 2016.
PSA Test Result
1. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/prostate-cancer/diagnosis/psa-testing/. Jun 2021.
2. 	https://patient.info/doctor/prostate-specifc-antigen-psa. Mar 2019.
3. 	http://www.uptodate.com/contents/screening-for-prostate-cancer
Prostatitis
1. 	NICE CKS. http://cks.nice.org.uk/prostatitis-acute. Nov 2020.
2. 	NICE CKS. http://cks.nice.org.uk/prostatitis-chronic. Sep 2019.
Overactive Bladder
1. 	NICE CKS. http://cks.nice.org.uk/luts-in-men. Mar 2019.
2. 	NICE Guidance. Lower urinary tract symptoms secondary to benign prostatic hyperplasia: tadalafl. Evidence
summary ESNM 18. Oct 2013.
UTI in Men and Haematuria
1. 	NICE CKS. http://cks.nice.org.uk/urinary-tract-infection-lower-men#!scenario. Nov 2018.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
3. 	NICE Guideline CG182. Chronic kidney disease in adults: assessment and management. Jan 2015.
Erectile Dysfunction
1. 	https://www.pcf.org/c/the-sexual-health-inventory-for-men-shim-questionnaire/
2. 	http://patient.info/doctor/erectile-dysfunction. Apr 2016.
3. 	https://www.relate.org.uk/
4. 	NICE Guideline NG12 Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/benign-prostatic-hyperplasia. Oct 2015.
2. 	http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/resectionofheprostate/Pages/Risks.aspx
3. 	Cyproterone-acetate. http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/cancers-in-general/treatment/cancer-drugs/
cyproterone-acetate. May 2020.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 290
Kidney and Urology

-- 305 of 575 --

➠ 291
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Alexander Dickens 	78 years 	M
PMH 	CKD, osteoarthritis and heart failure
Medications 	Paracetamol
Furosemide 20 mg
Spironolactone 50 mg
Indapamide 2.5 mg
Ramipril 5 mg
Bisoprolol 5 mg
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Last week seen by GP. Pitting oedema to knees. Sats 95%.
Crepitations at lung bases. JVP 3 cm. Agreed to increase
furosemide to two daily. BP 162/72. Ramipril increased from
2.5 mg to 5 mg.
Investigations 	Blood test 1 week ago: eGFR 51 mL/min/1.73 m2, creatinine 92
μmol/L, potassium 4.8 mmol/L and sodium 143 mmol/L.
Household 	Dorothy Dickens 	74 years 	F
Message from biochemistry: eGFR 32 mL/min/1.73 m2, creatinine 196 μmol/L,
potassium 5.5 mmol/L and sodium 142 mmol/L.

-- 306 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Acute Kidney Injury
Open ☐ 	Mr Dickens, I’m calling about your blood tests which show that your kidneys are struggling
more than usual. I wanted to talk to you about what may be causing this so we can put them
right again.
History ☐ 	Tell me the story about what led the doctor to see you last week. What medication changes
did you both make? How have you been since the doctor last saw you? Do you feel more
tired at all? Are you passing urine normally? Who is at home with you? Is Mrs Dickens
well?
Risk ☐ 	It is likely that the cause is a combination of things: medicines and age, unfortunately. Do
you have any problems with the fow of your urine or getting up at night? Good.
Flags ☐ 	Any fevers, any pain passing urine or going more frequently? Any loose stools or vomiting
recently? You started taking furosemide last week. What dose are you taking each day? And
can I check which other medicines you take?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned your knee plays up. Do you ever take anything for that?
Impact ☐ 	How active are you generally?
ICE ☐ 	Is there anything that keeps worrying you? Anything else you have wondered? Is there
anything else that you would like or would fnd helpful?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have been very worried that your breathing is getting worse, as it did 6
months ago, when you needed to go into hospital. You have been well on 80 mg furosemide
previously. Your main concern now is balancing the kidneys with the breathing.
Impression ☐ 	We call this acute kidney injury.
Experience ☐ 	Have you had problems with your kidney blood tests before?
Explanation ☐ I think what has caused it is a combination of factors that all impact on the kidney. Te
recent diarrhoea made the kidneys more dehydrated and increasing the ramipril and
furosemide at the same time was just too much for the kidneys. Te ibuprofen is also a
contributor unfortunately.
Sense ☐ 	You sound very disappointed.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate it must be very disheartening going from one problem to another.
Options ☐ 	Have you taken your medicines this morning? I would suggest you hold of taking them
until I’ve seen you. Can you come in to see me at the end of morning surgery?
Examination ☐ I would like to examine you. We can recheck the blood tests when you come. When you
arrive, can you please do a urine sample. We can look at your medicines, take your BP, listen
to your chest, look at your legs and knees and repeat your bloods. Does that sound okay?
Your blood tests from today will be back in a few hours.
Recommend ☐ We can make a plan for your medicines based on if there is extra fuid in your legs or lungs,
as well as your kidney result. I will call you again around 5.30 p.m. when the result will be
back. We may have to reduce one of your water tablets and we should stop the ibuprofen.
Do you have any thoughts or questions?
InCludE ☐ 	You aren’t in the least a nuisance and I’m sure we can sort some treatment for your knees
that won’t afect your kidneys, for example physiotherapy.
Future ☐ 	I wonder whether, to help monitor your breathing, we could involve the heart failure nurses?
It is likely I’ll be suggesting a repeat blood test and discussion with me in the next few weeks
so we can monitor the balance of fuid.
Empower ☐ 	You mentioned your weight has changed. Monitoring your weight is helpful to detect
warning signs and guide your medications. I also have some information to give you which
includes a card telling you what you can do when you feel unwell; it’s called a medicines’
sick day rule card. How will you get to the surgery? Great. See you at midday.
➠ 292
Kidney and Urology – 1

-- 307 of 575 --

➠ 293	
Patient’s Story 	Acute Kidney Injury
Doctor’s notes Alexander Dickens, 78 years. PMH: CKD, osteoarthritis and heart failure. Last week seen
by GP. Pitting oedema to knees. Sats 95%. Crepitations at lung bases. JVP 3 cm. Agreed
to increase furosemide to two daily. BP 162/72. Ramipril increased from 2.5 mg to 5 mg.
Medications: paracetamol, furosemide 20 mg, spironolactone 50 mg, indapamide 2.5 mg,
ramipril 5 mg, bisoprolol 5 mg. Blood test 1 week ago: eGFR 51 mL/min/1.73 m2, creatinine
92 μmol/L, potassium 4.8 mmol/L and sodium 143 mmol/L.
Message from biochemistry: eGFR 32 mL/min/1.73 m2, creatinine 196 μmol/L, potassium
5.5 mmol/L and sodium 142 mmol/L.
How to act 	You are surprised when the doctor calls.
PC 	‘Hello Doctor, what can I do for you?... I’m very well thank you.’
History 	Te doctor saw you last week. You were last in hospital 6 months ago when the fuid was
on your lungs. Tis was frightening. Since then, you have been ‘not too bad’ but you started
to feel the fuid coming back last week so called the doctor. You had noticed you were not
moving around the house as easily with your breathing. When the doctor suggested taking
40 mg furosemide, initially it didn’t seem to help so you increased it to 80 mg. Tey have
given you 120 mg in hospital before, so you thought 80 mg would be fne. You can tell your
fuid is going as your breathing is better and you have lost a little weight. You feel fne. Last
week, however, your grandchild came around and you had a day with diarrhoea. You feel
fne now. You are passing urine normally. You have no symptoms of a UTI. You have no
fever. Your knee arthritis does ‘play up’. If asked, tell the doctor you buy ibuprofen OTC
for this. Otherwise, you take only the prescribed medicines. You have not yet taken this
morning’s medication.
Social 	You live with your wife. Your son lives around the corner with your grandchildren.
You have a good circle of friends and don’t let your medical conditions get you down.
You have noticed a general decline in your health over the last few years.
ICE 	You have never heard of the diagnosis ‘acute kidney injury’.
You become very apologetic that you have changed the dose yourself without consulting
the doctor and apologise to the doctor for causing an inconvenience to them.
‘Oh dear Doctor, I am worried about my breathing… now my kidneys. I just can’t win.’
You are hoping the doctor will examine you again. Your son could bring you in.
You would like reassurance that your chest is okay and to talk about your knees.
Kidney and Urology – 1

-- 308 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Acute Kidney Injury
Defnition1
Serum creatinine rise of ≥26 μmol/L within 48 hours.
≥50% rise in serum creatinine known or presumed to have occurred within the past 7 days.
A fall in UO to <0.5 mL/kg/hour for >6 hours in adults or >8 hours in children and young people.
25% or greater fall in eGFR in children and young people within the past 7 days.
Risk factors for development of AKI1
• 	Age over 65 years
• 	Nephrotoxic drugs
• 	Previous AKI
• 	CKD
• 	Neurological or cognitive impairment or disa-
bility, which may mean limited access to fuids
because of reliance on a carer.
• 	Hypovolaemia
• 	Sepsis or infection (e.g. urine)
• 	Heart failure
• 	Diabetes
• 	Liver disease
• 	Severe diarrhoea (children and young people
with bloody diarrhoea are particularly at risk)
• 	Oliguria (UO <0.5 mL/kg/hour)
• 	Iodinated contrast used in past week
• 	Urological obstruction
• 	Haematological malignancy
• 	Hypotension
Management 	Urinalysis, ± urgent USS, manage the cause, think about acute nephritis, refer (immediately
if pyonephrosis, obstructed solitary kidney, bilateral obstruction, complications of AKI
caused by obstruction) for relief of obstruction if present, review nephrotoxic drugs and
repeat bloods and consider admission for renal replacement therapy.1
Complications Hyperkalaemia, metabolic acidosis, symptoms or complications of uraemia (pericarditis,
encephalopathy), fuid overload and pulmonary oedema.’1
Sick day rule card
Te sick day rule card was originally developed by NHS Highland to advise patients which medicines to stop
when they become unwell with either ‘vomiting or diarrhoea (unless only minor), fever sweats or shaking
unless only minor’.2 Medicines to stop include ACEIs, ARBs, NSAIDs, diuretics and metformin.2
Kidney and Urology – 1	
➠ 294

-- 309 of 575 --

➠ 295
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Bob Riley 	67 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Medications 	Lisinopril 5 mg daily
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	12 months ago – CKD G3bA2 diagnosed. Started on ACEI.
Investigations
Blood results:
12 months ago 	2 weeks ago
eGFR 40 mL/min/1.73 m2 	eGFR 37 mL/min/1.73 m2
ACR = 28 mg/mmol 	ACR = 29 mg/mmol Hb 146 g/L
Na 137 mmol/L
K 4.2 mmol/L
ALT 12 IU/L
ALP 60 IU/L
PSA 0.8 ng/mL
Cholesterol 3.1 mmol/L
HbA1c 36.6 mmol/mol
Household 	Phoebe Riley 	66 years 	F

-- 310 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Chronic Kidney Disease
Sense ☐ 	Tanks for phoning back. I can hear you are worried and keen to know your results.
Curious ☐ 	To interpret the latest test in the context of your health, I’m interested to know how you
have been feeling recently.
ICE ☐ 	Is there anything you are most concerned about today? And what did you think the blood
tests may show?
Impression ☐ 	Te latest kidney blood tests have shown that your kidneys are working pretty much the
same as last year, which is good news.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate this is not what you had hoped to hear.
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across others with kidney problems like yours?
Explanation ☐ Tere is ofen no cause, but CKD can be caused by medical problems such as high BP, which
is something you have had for a few years.
Risk ☐ 	Just to check other aspects of your health – in addition to hypertension, do you have any
other medical problems? Are you taking any medicines including ibuprofen? Any family
history of kidney problems? Have you ever smoked? Any problems passing urine, including
needing to go at night, or again afer you’ve just been or poor fow?
Flags ☐ 	May I just check – have you ever noticed any blood in your urine? Have you noticed any
swelling around the ankles?
History ☐ 	Are you keeping active? Tell me about your work. And your family? How do you like to
spend your time?
O/E ☐ 	Do you check your BP at home? Can you tell me the latest reading?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, to summarise, last year’s diagnosis of CKD was a shock, but you’ve worked on your
diet, reducing salt and processed foods, eating more fruit and veg and have felt well. You
are surprised that the recent blood test is not back to normal and are worried about what
this means. A friend is having dialysis and you hope you aren’t also heading for this.
Options ☐ 	Your kidney function is pretty much the same as last year – this is good news. Over time,
kidneys can become less efcient and so the numbers may get worse, but yours are stable.
We wouldn’t expect the kidney function to improve, but staying stable is very good. Tere
is no suggestion that you are heading towards dialysis at the moment. One thing we could
do is to protect your kidney blood vessels from the efects of raised cholesterol. I would like
to recommend a cholesterol tablet. Although your cholesterol is good, research has shown
that the tablet protects the vessels. Te tablet is called atorvastatin 20 mg, which you take
once a day. Have you heard of statins? Tere is the risk of side efects, e.g. muscle aches,
but many people are fne on them. Rarely, there is a risk of muscle breakdown, so if your
muscles did ache or you felt unwell then please tell your GP. Tis tablet can also afect the
liver, but we will be monitoring your blood tests. If your kidney tests changed quickly or
fell to below 30, we would ask the specialists to see you. Te kidney test is currently at the
level of 37. Normal is above 60. Do you have any thoughts or questions?
Empower ☐ 	To protect the health of the vessels, I suggest we monitor your BP; it is currently slightly
high so we might need to alter your tablets if it stayed up. As much exercise as possible and
decreasing your salt can be protective. If you decrease your salt by 6 g/day it can decrease
your BP by 10. Might these be things you could do? You probably know this from before,
but you need to avoid taking certain tablets from the chemist, such as ibuprofen, which can
make kidney function worse. Check frst before you buy anything.
Future ☐ 	Please can you check your BP twice a week for the next 4 weeks and then email me the
results? Please then arrange a telephone consultation with me to see if we need to increase
your BP medication. Regardless of this, we should repeat your blood test yearly to keep an
eye on kidney function.
Safety net ☐ 	I’m happy with your kidney function at the moment but, if you ever do notice anything
new, for example ankle swelling or blood in the urine, please let me know.
Kidney and Urology – 2	
➠ 296

-- 311 of 575 --

➠ 297	
Patient’s Story 	Chronic Kidney Disease
Doctor’s notes Bob Riley, 67 years. PMH: hypertension. Medications: lisinopril 5 mg daily.
Blood results 1 week ago: eGFR 37 mL/min/1.73 m2, ACR = 29 mg/mmol
Blood results 12 months ago: eGFR 40 mL/min/1.73 m2, ACR = 28 mg/mmol
Hb 146 g/L, Na 137 mmol/L, ALT 12 IU/L, ALP 60 IU/L, K 4.2 mmol/L, PSA 0.8 ng/mL,
cholesterol 3.3 mmol/L, HbA1c 36.6 mmol/mol, ACR 28 mg/mmol
How to act 	Concerned. You would like to know what the result means as soon as the GP tells you.
PC 	‘You asked me to phone you to get my blood test results. What’s wrong?’
History 	Tis is your frst annual review following the diagnosis of CKD last year.
Tis diagnosis came out of the blue – you had the blood tests a year ago for a routine health
check. You have no family history.
You have no outfow obstruction symptoms including no nocturia.
Social 	You live with your wife. You walk the dogs twice a day. Tis is your only exercise.
You enjoy the taste of your food but avoid sugary or fatty foods. You do add salt and think
you could easily cut this down. You have never smoked. You drink alcohol occasionally.
You take ramipril 5 mg, started 12 months ago.
ICE 	You have been worried about your kidneys ever since the diagnosis last year. You thought
that taking the tablets correctly would help your kidneys to return to near-normal (false
health belief). A friend has recently had to start dialysis and you are worried this might
happen to you.
You want to know what has caused this CKD – the doctor didn’t explain last year.
You are keen to do anything you can to protect your kidneys ‘Is there anything else I can
do to help my kidneys?’ and willingly accept a statin if ofered. If asked, you do check your
own BP at home and the latest reading is 137/82.
Examination 	BP is 137/82, urine dipstick is normal.
Kidney and Urology – 2

-- 312 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Chronic Kidney Disease
‘People with markers of kidney damage and those with a glomerular fltration rate (GFR) of less than 60 mL/
min/1.73 m2 on at least two occasions separated by a period of at least 90 days (with or without markers of kidney
damage).’ 1
Markers – kidney damage 	Albuminuria (ACR >3 mg/mmol) or urine sediment abnormalities.1
Electrolyte disorders, abnormal histology or renal imaging or history of renal
transplantation.1
Offer testing for CKD using eGFR creatinine and ACR to people with risk factors 	HTN, DM, CVD, AKI,
structural renal tract disease, recurrent renal calculi or prostatic hypertrophy,
multisystem diseases with potential kidney involvement – for example, SLE, FH of
end-stage kidney disease (GFR category G5), opportunistic detection of haematuria.
Do not use age, gender or ethnicity as risk markers to test people for CKD.
Do not use obesity alone as a risk marker to test people for CKD.
CKD investigations 	Repeat the test afer 2 weeks to exclude AKI.
To make a diagnosis of CKD another test is required in 3 months.
ACR must be a frst urine of the day.
Avoid meat 12 hours before the blood test.
eGFRcysC test – if available can diferentiate borderline CKD.
‘African-Caribbean or African family origin… multiply eGFR by 1.159.’1
CKD diagnosis 	eGFR <45 or ACR ≥3 (any eGFR) or eGFR <60 and eGFRcysC unavailable.
Progressive CKD 	Change in CKD category/12 months or ↓eGFR 25% or 15 mL/min/1.73 m2/year.1
Classifcation 	eGFR 45–59 = G3a. 30–44 = G3b, 15–29 = G4, eGFR <15 = G5.
ACR <3 = A1, ACR 3–30 = A2, ACR >30 = A3.1
Further investigations 	FBC (?Anaemia) and if eGFR <30, calcium, phosphate, PTH and vitamin D.
Urine dip for haematuria. Use ACR (not dipstick) for protein measurement.
Renal USS if eGFR <30, progressive CKD, haematuria, FH PCKD or obstruction or
may require a renal biopsy.1
Management 	CVD lifestyle advice. No protein-free diet unless instructed by the renal team.
If possible, stop nephrotoxic drugs.
Ofer antiplatelet drugs for CVD 20 prevention but be aware ↑risk of bleeding.1
BP aim 	<140/90 (target 120-139) or in diabetics <130/80 (target 120–129).1
Statins 	See: NICE CG 181.2 ‘Ofer atorvastatin 20 mg for the primary or secondary preven-
tion of CVD to people with CKD.’ See guidance for full details.
ACE inhibitor. Start if ACR (mg/mmol): ≥70 or ≥ 30 + HTN or ≥3 + DM and K
<5 mmol/L. Stop if change of eGFR ↓25% or creatinine ↑30% or K ≥6 mmol/L.
Monitoring frequency 	See Table 2 within reference.1
Refer if 	eGFR<30, ACR >70 (unless DM put on ACEI), ACR>30 + haematuria.
Progressive CKD. Suspected renal artery stenosis or suspected inherited condition.
≥4 antihypertensives.1
Discuss with medics if 	AKI, severe uraemia, fuid overload or hyperkalaemia.
Type 4 tubular acidosis 	In a diabetic with CKD and raised potassium… test for a low bicarbonate.
Manage BP and discuss with a specialist whether the Rx of furosemide (if oedema-
tous) and fudrocortisone is appropriate.
➠ 298
Kidney and Urology – 2

-- 313 of 575 --

➠ 299
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Remigio Sanchez 	48 years 	M
PMH 	No medical history
Medications 	No medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	2 years ago for a sof tissue injury of the ankle
Investigations 	PSA 3.0 ng/mL
Household 	Perla Sanchez 	48 years 	F
Sosimo Sanchez 	16 years 	M
Manuela Sanchez 	14 years 	F
Pilar Sanchez 	10 years 	M

-- 314 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	PSA Test Result
Open ☐ 	Tanks for talking to me on the phone. Can you tell me what led to this test being taken?
I can see we haven’t talked together for a long time.
Experience ☐ 	Tell me more about your father and brother’s experience. What is your understanding of
the PSA test? Has a doctor explained?
Sense ☐ 	I can tell you are keen to know the result.
Impression ☐ 	Te result is slightly raised; however, activities such as running, cycling, ejaculating or
intercourse can all increase this result. In the week prior to the test, did you do any of these
activities? Tat is helpful to know. Tis result cannot be interpreted and I would expect your
result to be raised if you have done those activities. I would like to repeat the test.
History ☐ 	Are you well? Any medical problems? Tell me more about you – your work and home. Do
you notice any problems when passing urine? What is the fow like? Is it painful? Do you
have to race to the toilet? Do you go frequently? Any fever? Any pain in the sides? How
many times do you pass urine at night? Is the fow okay? Do you have to wait because it
dribbles at the end? Aferwards do you feel your bladder isn’t quite empty? Are you always
thirsty? Any problems with erections?
ICE ☐ 	Is there anything else on your mind? What are you most fearful of? What did you think I
might suggest today?
Flags ☐ 	Have you seen any blood in the urine? Have you noticed any new back pain? Have you lost
weight? I’m pleased you have no symptoms.
Impact ☐ 	Getting a result can be worrying. How did you feel prior to phoning today?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned ‘I haven’t got time to be ill.’ Is this something that has been on your mind?
If this result were raised, have you had thoughts about how it may afect you?
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate that, with your family history and fear of the impact a diagnosis may have on
your life, this result is very important to you.
SummarICE ☐ 	So to summarise, your brother and father have prostate cancer and you have arranged this
test in the hope that if there was a cancer you are catching it early.
InCludE ☐ 	You fear how a diagnosis of prostate cancer would impact on your health and ability to
provide for your family. Tis has been very stressful for you.
Future ☐ 	I would really like to see you for an appointment to examine your prostate if I may. It would
involve lying on the couch behind the curtain, then I would insert one fnger into the back
passage as this is where we can feel the prostate. It is uncomfortable but not usually painful.
I would also like to feel your abdomen. Would that be okay? I would ask for a nurse chap-
erone if that is okay with you? Te reason for examining your prostate is to see if it feels
normal, or if it is enlarged or feels lumpy. Tis would help us decide what to do – whether
to repeat the blood test soon or refer you to see a urologist.
Explanation ☐ Te PSA level can be raised in prostate cancer. But it can also be raised in harmless growth
of the prostate. If the PSA level was raised, we would need a biopsy to diagnose or exclude a
cancer. Te biopsy is taken through the back passage; therefore, it can be an uncomfortable
procedure with the risk of infection.
Future ☐ 	Please book an appointment to see me soon so I can examine the prostate. If it feels normal,
we should repeat your blood test a week later. If this is raised, we would check your urine
and kidney function before referring you to the urologist. If the prostate feels lumpy or
abnormal, I would refer you to a urologist to be seen within 2 weeks.
Specifcs ☐ 	If we do need to repeat the blood test, you should avoid sex, ejaculation and exercise for 48
hours before the test.
Safety net ☐ 	If in future you have any problems passing urine, or any new pain, let a GP know.
➠ 300
Kidney and Urology – 3

-- 315 of 575 --

➠ 301	
Patient’s Story 	PSA Test Result
Doctor’s notes Remigio Sanchez, 48 years. PMH: PSA 3.0 ng/mL, nil else. Medications: none.
How to act 	Eager to know what will happen to you.
PC 	‘I’ve phoned for my PSA result.’
PMH 	You asked for the test as your brother has been diagnosed with prostate cancer.
You made an appointment with the phlebotomist and told her you needed the test.
You have never had any problems with your health.
Your father also had a total prostatectomy for prostate cancer.
You haven’t noticed any symptoms.
You attended the gym prior to the test being taken.
You understand the PSA test will tell you if you have prostate cancer.
Social 	‘I haven’t got time to be ill.’
You moved from Argentina 6 years ago for work on oil rigs.
You spend a lot of time away from home.
Your work would not be sympathetic if you needed time of.
Tey ofen make people redundant. You feel the pressure of fnances at the moment with
three children who want to go to university.
ICE 	You assume you have prostate cancer too and want to catch it early.
You are worried that you will need chemotherapy.
You couldn’t sleep last night because of fear of the result.
You expect the doctor to send you for a biopsy. You have had no UTI symptoms.
Examination 	Prostate and abdomen are normal.
Kidney and Urology – 3

-- 316 of 575 --

Learning Points 	PSA Test Result
Consider a PSA test to check for prostate cancer in:
• 	Associated LUTS.1
• 	Visible haematuria.1
• 	Erectile dysfunction.1
• 	Unexplained symptoms (such as lower back ache, weight loss and bone pain) – might be due to
secondaries.
• 	Men aged >50 afer counselling (even if asymptomatic*).
*Prostate cells adjacent to urethra (transitional zone of the prostate) commonly change to become hyper-
plastic (BPH) whereas prostate cancer arises in the peripheral zone of the prostate – the part you can feel
on DRE. Hence men with early prostate cancer are usually asymptomatic. Men who present with LUTS
due to prostate cancer ofen have locally advanced disease. However, BPH and prostate cancer can coexist.
Occasionally tumours arise from the anterior portion of the gland, and are impalpable.
Symptoms from bladder outfow obstruction (from BPH or cancer of the prostate) may include:
• 	Urgency, frequency, incontinence or nocturia.
• 	Hesitancy, poor fow or post-micturition dribbling.
Symptoms of metastases may include back or bone pain, haematuria or weight loss.
Erectile dysfunction is not usually caused by prostate cancer but completes a Well Man history.
Men with low back pain: always consider a PSA test (as well as a myeloma screen and kidney/ureteric
disease).
PSA counselling2
• 	Prostate cancer is not the only cause of a raised PSA.
• 	PSA cannot distinguish between aggressive and slow-growing cancers that would never have caused a
problem.
• 	15% of men with prostate cancer will have normal PSA.
• 	Prostate biopsies are negative in three out of four men with raised PSA.
• 	Prostate biopsy may cause infection and bleeding.
• 	Treatment of prostate cancer includes surgery, radiotherapy, hormones with side efects of incontinence,
ED and fertility loss.
• 	NOT having test will avoid side efects of treatment – but may mean that early treatable cancers are
missed.
2WW referral
1. Abnormal PSA levels. Normal is 0–4 but the PSA test is not diagnostic and the upper level varies accord-
ing to race and age. NICE recommends 2WW referral for any man with PSA > age-specifc range.1
2. Suspicious prostate on DRE.1
Signifcant rise in PSA whilst taking a 5-alpha reductase inhibitor.3
PSA rises in cancer, BPH, UTI, exercise (e.g. cycling), ejaculation, urinary retention or surgical intervention,
e.g. fexible cystoscopy.
PSA is suppressed in men by up to 50% in the frst year of taking fnasteride or other 5-alpha reductase
inhibitor.
➠ 302
Kidney and Urology – 3

-- 317 of 575 --

➠ 303
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Arthur Smalling 	49 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Irritable bowel syndrome
Depression
Medications 	Amlodipine 5 mg OD
Mebeverine 135 mg TDS
Citalopram 20 mg OD
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Patricia Smalling 	42 years 	F

-- 318 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Prostatitis
Open ☐ 	Please don’t be embarrassed. Please tell me about the problem. How is going to the toilet?
History ☐ 	Some specifc questions about your symptoms… Some of the questions are a little personal.
How long have you had this pain? What sort of pain is it? Does anything bring it on or
make it worse? How are your bowels? Have you passed any blood? Any mucus? How are
your waterworks? Any pain passing urine? Going more ofen or in the night? Do you have
to rush to the toilet? Does the urine fow start straight away or is there a pause? How is the
stream? Does the fow stop and start? Do you get dribbling at the end when you think you
have fnished? Have you had a water infection before? Have you had any problems sexually?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had any thoughts about what could be causing your symptoms? Are you worried
about anything in particular? Were you hoping I would do anything specifc today?
Flags ☐ 	Have you ever seen blood in your urine? Or blood in your semen? Have you had a fever?
Or any weight loss? Any new sexual partners?
Impact ☐ 	How have these symptoms been afecting you? How is your mental health?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned being saddle sore. Have you been cycling a lot recently?
SummarICE ☐ 	So you have been experiencing pain in your back passage, pain between your privates and
bottom, and discomfort passing urine. You have also noted that your stream isn’t as fast as it
used to be and have had some sexual issues and pain on ejaculation. You wondered if your
symptoms were caused by cycling a lot, but the symptoms didn’t improve with a month of
cycling. You haven’t had a fever or passed blood and your bowels are working normally.
O/E ☐ 	Do you have a thermometer at home? And are you able to check your pulse and BP? Good,
thank you. It’s reassuring that those are normal. It would also be really helpful if I could
arrange to examine your tummy, testes and back passage. Tis will help me with the diag-
nosis. Would it be okay to see you later today? Would you mind if a chaperone was present?
It would also be really helpful if you could provide a urine sample for testing; could you
bring one with you?
Impression ☐ 	It is possible that you may have chronic prostatitis, which means infammation of the
prostate. A urine infection is less likely, given all your symptoms.
Experience ☐ 	Do you know much about the prostate?
InCludE ☐ 	You thought you might be saddle sore, but in fact I think this may be a prostate problem.
Explanation ☐ Te prostate is a gland found in every man and is located in the pelvis. Prostatitis is a con-
dition where the prostate becomes infamed. Sometimes it’s due to a bacterial infection but
sometimes there is no obvious reason why the prostate becomes infamed. It is not a form
of cancer and isn’t usually caused by sexually transmitted infections. Classic symptoms are
pain in the region between your scrotum and anus – called the perineum – pain in the back
passage and problems passing urine or with intercourse. Because the symptoms have been
there for more than 3 months, we call the condition chronic. Unfortunately, it can be tricky
to treat, but most men notice an improvement within 6 months. Any questions?
Future ☐ 	When I see you, I would also like to send a urine sample of to check for bacteria. It would
be helpful if you could complete a couple of questionnaires before you come, to identify how
the symptoms have been afecting you. One is called the International Prostate Symptom
Score and the other is the National Health Institute – Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index.
I will email these to you. We would normally treat prostatitis with a month of antibiotics.
Do you have any allergies?
Specifcs ☐ 	If it is clear you do have prostatitis, I would like to start you on ciprofoxacin 500 mg BD
(check local guidance), is that okay? We would review you in about 2 weeks to decide if you
need any blood tests to check the kidney and prostate levels. If we are not making progress,
we will ask a specialist to see you.
Safety net ☐ 	Should your symptoms worsen at any time or you develop a fever or pass blood, please let
me know straight away. If the surgery is closed, call 111 for a doctor.
Kidney and Urology – 4	
➠ 304

-- 319 of 575 --

➠ 305	
Patient’s Story 	Prostatitis
Doctor’s notes Arthur Smalling, 49 years. PMH: HTN, IBS, Depression. Medications: amlodipine, citalo-
pram, mebeverine.
How to act 	Embarrassed.
PC 	‘Hello Doctor, I’m rather embarrassed, I’ve been getting a lot of pain in my bottom.’
History 	For the last 4 months you have been experiencing pain in your rectum. Te pain can be
sharp or a burning pain. You have been opening your bowels normally, passing a sof stool
each day. No PR bleed or mucus. You have also had discomfort when passing urine for
a number of weeks. You feel tender in the region between your ‘privates’ and anus. Your
stream isn’t as good as it used to be but isn’t too bad. You get up 1–2 times a night to pass
urine. Until 4 months ago you hadn’t noticed any frequency or urgency in the daytime. You
have not seen blood in your urine. You don’t sufer with hesitancy or terminal dribbling.
You have had a couple of episodes of ED which you thought were due to your age (and
possibly cycling), but you have also had pain during ejaculation which you thought was
odd. No weight loss. No fever. No history of UTIs. You have been married for 25 years and
have not had any other partners. You have been very well with your mental health.
ICE 	You are a keen cyclist so initially thought cycling may be causing your symptoms. You have
been training for a 100-mile bike ride for charity. You stopped cycling 4 weeks ago but
unfortunately you haven’t got any better so you thought you should get checked out.
‘I thought I’d got a little saddle sore!’
Examination 	Temperature 36.3 °C. HR 68 bpm. BP 136/88.
Abdomen sof and non-tender.
Testicular examination normal.
Tender perineum.
Tender slightly enlarged smooth prostate on rectal examination.
Urine dipstick: leuco ++, protein +, blood trace, nitrite negative.
Kidney and Urology – 4

-- 320 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Prostatitis
Acute prostatitis1
Symptoms 	Febrile illness, urinary symptoms + perineal/suprapubic pain.
Examination 	Exquisitely tender prostate, leucocytes on urine dipstick.
Investigations 	MSU and STI screening. Blood cultures.
Acutely unwell If severely ill, unable to take oral antibiotics or acute urinary retention admit to hospital.
Urgent referral Immunocompromised, diabetes, pre-existing urological condition or catheterised.
Chronic prostatitis (two types)2
1. Chronic bacterial prostatitis (10%).
2. Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CPPS = 90%).
Although prostatitis suggests infection and infammation, the pathology is poorly understood. Te histology
does not always refect the symptoms or treatment response. Chronic bacterial prostatitis is thought to be
caused by recurrent UTIs, undertreated acute bacterial prostatitis, ascending urethral infection or lymphatic
spread from the rectum. Te cause of CPPS is unclear.
Symptoms:
Pain 	Perineum, inguinal, suprapubic, penis, scrotum, testes, rectum, lower back or abdomen.
LUTS 	Hesitancy, urgency, poor stream, terminal dribbling, frequency, nocturia or dysuria.
Sexual 	ED, painful ejaculation, premature ejaculation or decreased libido.
History needs to identify/exclude: a UTI, acute prostatitis, haematospermia (may be prostatitis but also
prostate cancer or STI), IBS (present in up to 30% of men with chronic prostatitis).
Duration of symptoms – minimum of 3 months.
Assess symptom severity using the National Institute of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index or IPSS.
Assess for depression/anxiety if cues to suggest this.
Examination: observations (rule out acute infection/sepsis), abdominal examination (tenderness, bladder
distension or retention), external genitalia (urethral discharge, phimosis, meatal stenosis, penile cancer),
DRE (prostate size, lumps? and tenderness).
Diferential: acute prostatitis, prostatic abscess, UTI, urethritis, pyelonephritis, epididymitis, BPH, cancer
of prostate/bladder/colon, urethral stricture, obstructive calculus in urinary tract or foreign body and
pudendal neuralgia.
Investigations 	Urine dip and MSU (try sending MSU afer DRE to increase microbiology yield).
Consider full STI screen (esp. if <35 years or new partner).
Bloods: Consider PSA testing and routine bloods, e.g. FBC, U&E and CRP.
NB: MSU may be negative in chronic bacterial prostatitis so look for old MSUs.
Management 	4–6 weeks antibiotic (check local guidance).
NICE – ciprofoxacin, ofoxacin or trimethoprim if quinolones not tolerated/allergy.
Trial alpha-blocker if LUTS present.
Paracetamol ± NSAID, laxatives if constipation also present.
Refer 	If diagnosis in doubt.
Severe symptoms or if chronic bacterial prostatitis is suspected.
➠ 306
Kidney and Urology – 4

-- 321 of 575 --

➠ 307
Doctor’s Notes
Patient
PMH
Angus McLaughlin 	72 years 	M
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Ischaemic heart disease
Medications
Hypertension
Salbutamol PRN
Allergies
Tiotropium 18 mg OD
Aspirin 75 mg OD
Isosorbide mononitrate 20 mg BD
Atorvastatin 80 mg nocte
Bisoprolol 5 mg OD
Ramipril 2.5 mg OD
No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations
Household
No recent investigations
No household members registered

-- 322 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Overactive Bladder
Open ☐ 	Could you tell me a little more about your symptoms?
History ☐ 	How did it start? How ofen are you passing urine during the day/night? Do you have to rush?
Do you have any episodes where you don’t make it to the toilet in time, causing a leak of urine?
What is the fow of urine like? Does the fow of urine ever take time to get going? Do you ever
dribble urine afer you think you have fnished? How are your bowels? Do you drink much tea
or cofee? How much alcohol do you drink? Have you avoided drinking fuids?
ICE ☐ 	You mentioned having to rush to the toilet; is there a particular concern you have? You also
mentioned your prostate at the beginning; is that something you have been worrying about?
Were you hoping that I’d do anything particular today?
Flags ☐ 	Is it painful to urinate? Any blood? Weight loss? Tummy or back pain? Recent angina?
Sense ☐ 	I sense these symptoms have become a real nuisance to you.
Impact ☐ 	Have you had to stop doing anything that you enjoy?
How is your mood? Have the symptoms been disrupting your sleep?
SummarICE ☐ 	So for several months you have been passing urine every hour during the day and every couple
of hours at night. You fnd it difcult to rush to the toilet due to breathlessness and you fear
bringing on an angina attack. Unfortunately, you have had to stop going to the pub as you worry
about having an accident. You also worry about smelling of urine if you have an accident. You
thought your symptoms may be due to your prostate and particularly fear prostate cancer.
InCludE ☐ 	I’m sorry to hear that this is stopping you getting out. Tankfully I don’t think there is a problem
with your prostate.
Impression ☐ 	I think you may have something called ‘overactive bladder’. It would really help me assess your
symptoms if I could examine you. Would you be able to come to the surgery this morning? Tank
you. I would like to examine your abdomen, if possible your genitals and your prostate – this
involves placing a fnger into your rectum. Are you okay for me to do this examination? I would
ask a chaperone to be present for the intimate examinations if that’s okay with you? From what
I’ve heard so far, I don’t think it’s cancer and you won’t need an operation.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of overactive bladder?
Explanation ☐ 	Overactive bladder is a condition where the bladder is sensitive and empties suddenly, ofen
when it’s not even very full. It’s not a harmful condition although it can cause troublesome
symptoms. Te main treatment is ‘bladder training’ but sometimes medications can help. What
are you thinking at this point?
Empower ☐ 	Tere are some simple things you can do to help. Reducing cafeine and alcohol ofen improves
symptoms as these both irritate the bladder and have a diuretic afect which means they make
you pass more urine. Although reducing fuid intake may sound like a sensible thing to do,
actually this can make the problem worse as concentrated urine can irritate the bladder. We
can check the prostate blood test. If the level is raised, we would repeat the test. You may need
a biopsy. I will give you information to read and we can discuss this next time. Any questions?
Future ☐ 	I would like to send a urine sample of to ensure that there is no water infection causing your
symptoms. It would be really helpful if you could complete a ‘frequency volume chart’ for me.
Tis simply means recording on a chart, which I will give you, each time you go to the toilet to
pass urine and, if possible, measuring the volume of urine passed. Some people will buy a cheap
plastic measuring jug to do this. Would it be possible for you to do this? Ten we can have a look
at the chart together and discuss the bladder training techniques. Would you like me to ask our
district nurses to supply you with some pads you could use in the meantime – just in case?
InCludE ☐ 	I’m also mindful that your angina and breathlessness are causing problems and at your next
appointment we should allow time to see if we can improve your symptoms perhaps by changing
your medication.
Specifcs ☐ 	I have an appointment free at 11 a.m. Would that suit? Great – I’ll see you then.
Safety net ☐ 	When we meet up later this morning, we could also arrange a follow-up appointment in a couple
of weeks to see how you are doing. If your symptoms worsen, you develop pain or see blood in
your urine, please let me know straight away.
➠ 308
Kidney and Urology – 5

-- 323 of 575 --

➠ 309	
Patient’s Story 	Overactive Bladder
Doctor’s notes Angus McLaughlin, 72 years. PMH: COPD, IHD, HTN. Medications: salbutamol PRN,
tiotropium 18 mg, aspirin 75 mg, ISMN 20 mg BD, atorvastatin 80 mg, bisoprolol 5 mg,
ramipril 2.5 mg.
How to act 	Concerned.
PC 	‘Doctor, I’m having trouble getting to the toilet. Do you think it’s my prostate?’
History 	For several months you have been having difculty passing urine. You feel that you have to
go every hour during the day and every couple of hours during the night. You suddenly get
the urge to pass urine and if you don’t fnd a toilet quickly you will ofen have an accident.
You are ofen short of breath due to your COPD so fnd it difcult: ‘I have to rush to the
loo.’
As a result, you have started to avoid going out so that you can stay close to the toilet. You
were fond of meeting friends in your local pub for a beer but now feel you can’t do this.
You worry that you’ll have an accident and will smell of urine ‘like an old man’. You know
some of your friends had difculty with their waterworks and one needed an operation on
his prostate. You drink two cups of tea in the morning and have another before bed.
No dysuria. No hesitancy or terminal dribbling. Good stream. No intermittency. No ED.
Normal bowel habit. No haematuria. No weight loss.
Social 	You are a retired miner. Your wife passed away 3 years ago so you live alone now. You feel
a bit lonely and isolated now you feel you can’t go out.
Ex-smoker.
Drink 2 pints of ale a day.
ICE 	You are worried you may have prostate cancer.
You worry about getting angina attacks if you have to hurry but this has not happened.
You have heard about prostate cancer and fear having an operation. You expect the doctor
to examine your prostate. You hope the doctor will arrange some tests.
Examination 	Abdominal examination normal.
Prostate smooth and normal size.
Kidney and Urology – 5

-- 324 of 575 --

➠ 310
Learning Points 	Overactive Bladder
NICE advice – Overactive bladder1
Take a full history of the symptoms as with other lower urinary tract symptoms. Look for drugs and lifestyle
factors which may be exacerbating the symptoms. Ask about the impact on life.
Examination should include abdominal, genital and DRE.
Suggest patient completes a ‘frequency volume chart’. Te patient is asked to record the number of times
they pass urine, the volume of urine passed each time and any other signifcant information such as episodes
of incontinence, what they drink, how much and when. Tis helps to quantify the patient’s symptoms and
highlights problems such as nocturia.
Management
Conservative measures:
• 	Bladder training.
• 	Avoid cafeine and alcohol. Carbonated sof drinks and fruit juice may aggravate symptoms.
• 	Avoidance of dehydration (concentrated urine can exacerbate the problem).
• 	Weight loss may help.
• 	Pelvic foor exercises may help men, especially if history of stress incontinence as well.
• 	Ofer containment devices, e.g. pads or external sheaths to help whilst problem is being investigated.
Drug treatment1
Ofer antimuscarinic (anticholinergic) – oxybutynin (immediate release), tolterodine (immediate release),
or darifenacin (once daily preparation) can be used frst line. If frst line fails, ofer alternative. Common
side efects of antimuscarinics: dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation, headache,
indigestion and abdominal pain. Do not ofer oxybutynin (immediate release) to frail older men due to the
risk of impairment of daily functioning, chronic confusion, or acute delirium (less common).
Second line (if antimuscarinic contraindicated or inefective): mirabegron. Also consider this if the patient
already has a high anticholinergic burden with the other medications they take, due to increased risk of
Alzheimer’s. (Even warfarin has anticholinergic efects.)
An antimuscarinic can be used alongside an alpha-blocker in patients with both voiding and storage
symptoms.2
Refer if above measures are unsuccessful.
For assessment of LUTS in general use:
Te International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) questionnaire to assess severity and impact on qual-
ity of life.
See below for more details about lower urinary tract symptoms and BPH.
Kidney and Urology – 5

-- 325 of 575 --

➠ 311	
Extra Notes 	UTI in Men and Haematuria
Differential diagnosis1 Urethritis, pyelonephritis, kidney cancer, calculi, epididymitis, bladder cancer,
prostate cancer.
Investigations 	Urine dipstick AND urine culture.
If microscopic haematuria is detected in a man ≥60 years without dysuria and the
MSU returns as negative → FBC and U&E.
Complications 	Pyelonephritis, prostatitis and some bacteria increase the risk of stones.1
Treatment 	1 week of treatment, e.g. trimethoprim/nitrofurantoin – see local guidance.1
When to refer to Urology for further investigations:
UTI fails to respond to antibiotics.1
Recurrent UTI – two or more in a 3-month period.1
‘Even if >60 years – NICE advise this is a non-urgent referral.’2
‘However, if recurrent UTI with haematuria present – see below.’
Genitourinary history suggests a cause or risk factor: e.g. stones, operations, bladder outfow obstruction.1
Persistent microscopic haematuria and normal renal function.1
If renal function impaired or proteinuria – refer to renal.1
Refer 2WW through the suspected cancer (for urological/renal cancer)
pathway if:
>45 years 	Unexplained visible haematuria (asymptomatic or negative MSU).2
Visible haematuria which persists or recurs despite Rx for UTI.2
>60 years 	Unexplained non-visible haematuria (negative MSU) AND EITHER dysuria OR ↑
serum WCC.2
Mass 	Is identifed (clinically or on imaging).1
Remember to use dipstick (not microscopy) to assess for haematuria and if one dipstick is positive → TWO
more dipsticks are required. If EITHER of these shows a haematuria → refer (speed of referral depends on
age as above).3 1+ on dipstick or more is signifcant. Routine referral if persistent non-visible haematuria
which doesn’t meet the above criteria for suspected cancer pathway referral.
Haematuria follow-up. ‘Persistent invisible haematuria in the absence of proteinuria should be followed up
annually with repeat testing for haematuria, proteinuria or albuminuria, GFR and BP monitoring as long
as the haematuria persists.’ 3
Kidney and Urology

-- 326 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Erectile Dysfunction
Causes of ED
Vascular disease 	Risk factors include: HTN, smoking, hypercholesterolaemia and DM.
Structural 	Surgery within the pelvis. Peyronie’s disease.
Skin disorders 	Foreskin problems (lichen sclerosis, balanitis, xerotica obliterans).
Neurological 	Tumour, spinal cord disease, MS, Parkinson’s, stroke, peripheral neuropathy (DM).
Hormonal 	Hypogonadism, Cushing’s, thyroid, hyperprolactinaemia.
Drug induced 	Diuretics, SSRIs, GnRH analogues and antagonists, antipsychotics.
Alcohol and recreational drugs
Psychological causes Stress, depression, anxiety, relationship difculties, performance anxiety.
SHIM 	Sexual health inventory for men1 score may be useful.
Tailor investigations to the likely cause depending on symptoms, age and risk factors.
Te patient may have their own terminology in a sexual health history. Use words
they have chosen.
Make no assumptions Ask about other sexual partners and confrm their partner’s gender.
Management options
Sildenafil 	CI include: already on a nitrate, unstable angina, recent MI or stroke, optic
neuropathy.
Side efects: headaches, fushing, N&V, dizziness and visual disturbances.
Interactions: no alpha-blocker within 4 hours.
Other options 	2nd line tadalafl (Cialis) with a longer duration of efect.
Vacuum pumps. MUSE (alfraprostadil per urethra) and caverject.2
Relationship counselling3 or a referral to psychosexual medicine may be helpful.
Show you have recognised the opportunity for health screening and promotion.
The Well Man check 	CVD RFs, prostate and testicular screening, weight and bowel changes, stress/mood.
PSA screening 	Ofer all men with ED PSA screening.4
➠ 312
Kidney and Urology

-- 327 of 575 --

➠ 313	
Extra Notes 	Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy
BPH management
Conservative 	Reduce cafeine and alcohol. Bladder exercises.
Alpha-blocker1 E.g. tamsulosin
Explanation to patient: ‘Acts by relaxing the prostate.’
Side efects: drowsiness, light-headedness from low BP and retrograde ejaculation, which
some men fnd very troublesome. Review afer 4–6 weeks.
5-alpha reductase inhibitor1
E.g. fnasteride
Explanation to patient: ‘Acts by blocking the conversion of testosterone to a stronger hormone
which increases the size of the prostate.’
Side efects: loss of libido, ED, ejaculation problems and gynaecomastia.
Review in 3–6 months but can take up to 6 months to work.
Reduces PSA so avoid use if watchful waiting.
Transurethral resection of the prostate
90% risk of retrograde ejaculation. Other risks: incontinence, infection, retention, need for
re-TURP, ED, strictures, bleeding, TURP syndrome and death.2
Tadalafl 	Helps with ED and outfow symptoms.
Prostate cancer specialist management
Conservative 	Watchful waiting (usually frail elderly) or active surveillance (regular MRIs ± biop-
sies) – usually in men with low-risk cancers.
Hormonal 	Bicalutamide or cyproterone acetate prior to giving goserelin analogue.3
Goserelin – check LFTs 6 monthly.
Chemotherapy (increasing role of chemotherapy in metastatic prostate cancer) and
radiotherapy.
Total/radical prostatectomy.
Kidney and Urology

-- 328 of 575 --

Counselling for PSA testing… an example
‘Te prostate is a gland that helps make semen. It is located near the bladder and rectum. As men get older
it can become cancerous. Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men, in fact 80% of men in their
80s have evidence of prostate cancer. Most prostate cancers are slow growing, especially in more elderly
gentlemen and the cancer may be so slow growing that these men may never be afected by the cancer in
their lifetime. Terefore, some men prefer not to know. However, in other men prostate cancer may be fast
growing and spread to other areas like the bones in the back. Tere is a blood test called a PSA test which can
be helpful in identifying prostate cancer in some patients. It checks for a chemical released from the prostate,
called PSA. If this is high, it may be a sign of prostate cancer but may just be a sign of a large prostate, which
is harmless. Because PSA can be raised when there isn’t cancer, this can mean men having unnecessary tests
done. Also, around 20% of prostate cancers have a normal PSA. To help fnd these cancers we also feel the
prostate through the rectum to see if it feels abnormal. Any questions so far? If either PSA or examination
are abnormal, we refer men to the urologists who would usually perform a biopsy. Tis biopsy, which means
taking small pieces of the prostate, is taken through the back passage and is therefore an uncomfortable
procedure and has a risk of causing an infection or bleeding in the prostate. You have/do not have symptoms
of prostate problems but symptoms do not necessarily correlate with the cancer. You are welcome to take
reading material home to think about it, or have you already made a decision?… If you would like the test, I
suggest I examine your prostate, then we’ll do the blood test in 1 week. I suggest waiting a week as examining
the prostate can falsely increase the PSA level. So can exercise, cycling, sex and ejaculation. I will give you
information on when to stop these activities prior to the test.’
➠ 314
Kidney and Urology

-- 329 of 575 --

CHAPTER 13 OVERVIEW
Mental Health
➠ 315
Cases in
this chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum: Mental
Health
Learning points in this chapter include:
1 	Anxiety 	‘Anxiety including generalised anxiety
and panic disorders, phobias, obsessive–
compulsive disorder, situational anxiety
and adjustment reactions’
NICE Guideline CG113. Generalised anxiety
disorder and panic disorder in adults:
management. July 2019
CBT model
2 	Depression
Review
‘Mood (affective) problems such as
depression including features of a
major depression such as psychotic and
biological symptoms; bipolar disorder,
assessment of suicidal risk; detection of
masked depression’
NICE Guideline CG90. Depression in adults:
recognition and management. October 2009
3 	Personality
Disorder
‘Personality disorders including borderline,
antisocial, narcissistic’
NICE Guideline CG78. Borderline
personality disorder: recognition and
management. January 2009
4 	Postnatal
Psychosis
‘Pregnancy-associated disorders such
as antenatal, perinatal and postnatal
depression. Puerperal psychosis’
NICE Guideline CG192. Antenatal
and postnatal mental health: clinical
management and service guidance.
February 2020
5 	Eating
Disorder
‘Eating disorders including morbid obesity,
anorexia and bulimia nervosa, body
dysmorphia and Other Specifed Feeding
and Eating Disorders (OSFED)’
NICE Guideline NG69. Eating disorders:
recognition and treatment. December 2020

-- 330 of 575 --

CHAPTER 13 REFERENCES
Anxiety
1. 	NICE Guideline CG113. Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults: management. Jul 2019.
2. 	Williams C.J. Overcoming Depression: A Five Areas Approach. London: Arnold. 2001.
3. 	Williams C., Garland A. A cognitive–behavioural therapy assessment model for use in everyday clinical practice.
Adv Psychiatr Treat 2002; 8: 172-9.
Depression Review
1. NICE Guideline CG90. Depression in adults: recognition and management. Oct 2009.
Personality Disorder
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/emotionally-unstable-personality-disorder. Jan 2016.
2. 	NICE Guideline CG78. Borderline personality disorder: recognition and management. Jan 2009.
3. 	https://www.nice.org.uk/news/article/new-standard-to-improve-the-care-of-people-with-personality-disorders.
Jun 2015.
4. 	https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/mental-health/problems-disorders/personality-disorder
Postnatal Psychosis
1. 	http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/healthadvice/problemsdisorders/postnataldepression.aspx
2. 	NICE Guideline CG192. Antenatal and postnatal mental health: clinical management and service guidance. Feb
2020.
3. 	http://patient.info/doctor/postpartum-psychosis-pro. Mar 2015.
Eating Disorder
1. 	NICE Guideline NG69. Eating disorders: recognition and treatment. Dec 2020.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 316
Mental Health

-- 331 of 575 --

➠ 317
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Stephen Harper 	42 years 	M
PMH 	Irritable bowel syndrome
Medications 	No current medications. Previous medications include
mebeverine.
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	GP consultation 5 weeks ago. Intermittent bloating. No red fags.
Impression IBS.
A&E attendance with chest pain – discharge letter, tests all normal
and reassured.
Investigations 	FBC, U&E, LFT, TFTs, GGT, CRP, HbA1c, ESR and coeliac screen
all normal 1 month ago.
Household 	Judith Harper 	43 years 	F
Bridget Harper 	15 years 	F
Aidan Harper 	14 years 	M

-- 332 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Anxiety
Open ☐ 	Can you tell me more about your bowels? Anything else you have noticed? Do you feel well?
History ☐ 	Any other problems in the past? Have you taken any medication? Did it work? As it’s the
frst time we’ve spoken, please tell me more about you. How are things at home? Work?
Flags ☐ 	Any change in your bowels? Any bleeding? Any weight loss? Any pain? What is your sleep-
ing pattern? Your appetite? Are you able to enjoy activities? What comes to mind when you
think about the future?
Sense ☐ 	You seem quiet today; is there anything else on your mind?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think is the main problem? Is there any other diagnosis that has crossed your
mind? What were your thoughts regarding what we may decide today? Any other thoughts
about this? What is your biggest fear?
Curious ☐ 	I’m interested to know what you mean by ‘turning 40… a mid-life crisis’. Where do you
think this has come from? Has a terminal illness happened to anyone you know?
Impact ☐ 	What triggers these thoughts? Does it make you feel unwell? Ten what do you do?
Risk ☐ 	Any thoughts of hurting yourself or suicide? How much alcohol do you drink? Any other drugs?
SummarICE ☐ 	You are worrying about your health, in particular the risk of bowel cancer and the possibility
of dying from this or from a heart attack.
Impression ☐ 	Tankfully, there are no worrying bowel symptoms. Tere is no weight loss, bleeding or
change in your bowels and I see your blood tests were reassuring. I am a cautious doctor
but I am confdent that we do not need a colonoscopy. My feeling is that anxiety is driving
your symptoms and fears, causing panic attacks. What are your thoughts about all this?
Experience ☐ 	Has anyone else you know sufered with anxiety? Do you know of ways to help?
Explanation ☐ Everyone has negative thoughts, but when these start to impact on your life we need to
help you recognise the triggers and help you fnd ways to manage them. Panic attacks occur
when normal hormones in the body get released inappropriately. Tese hormone reactions
are normal when we are in dangerous situations but, when you have anxiety, they can occur
in everyday situations when there isn’t any danger.
InCludE ☐ 	Your symptoms of a racing heart, breathlessness, etc. are real but are triggered by a psycho-
logical process and thankfully aren’t being caused by a heart problem.
Options ☐ 	Tere are things that you can do for anxiety, things I can help with and things others can
help you with too. Relaxation exercises may help. You could contact MIND who will advise
on local support groups. I can help with suggestions, monitoring and prescribing if needed,
but help which doesn’t involve medication can be just as powerful or more so. Others who
can help may include family, friends or therapists for anxiety. Tere are useful resources,
websites such as FearFighter.com and, on the Mindfulness website, a ‘3-minute breathing
space’ exercise. Tere are also books: do you enjoy reading? I recommend Mindfulness: A
Practical Guide to Finding Peace in a Frantic World. What are your thoughts if I provide a
list of all these suggestions for you to consider.
Empathy ☐ 	Anxiety can have a huge impact on one’s life. Here is an explanation of the therapy called
CBT. If anyone thinks they have terminal illness, we would expect the emotional and phys-
ical responses. Tese are natural. Te behaviour response and initial thought is where the
CBT can help, over time, gradually giving you tools to step out of the circle.
Empower ☐ 	Do any of these suggestion sound like they might work for you? Who else could help?
Future ☐ 	I would recommend that you have a look at the information. Recognising that your symp-
toms are anxiety can help you feel more in control but, if next time we meet we need more
help, I would recommend calling Talking Space to arrange CBT.
Specifcs ☐ 	I can give you their phone number and website details and you can refer yourself by ringing
them or contacting them online. Shall we catch up again in a month to see how you are
getting on? You can prebook an appointment online. Please phone me earlier if you need to.
Safety net ☐ 	If you feel your mood drops or you have new symptoms, for example your bowels change,
you lose weight or see blood in the stool, please tell a doctor.
Mental Health – 1	
➠ 318

-- 333 of 575 --

Patient’s Story 	Anxiety
➠ 319
Doctor’s notes Stephen Harper, 42 years. PMH: irritable bowel syndrome. Medications: no current
medication. Past medication: mebeverine.
GP consultation 5 weeks ago. Intermittent bloating. No red fags. Impression IBS.
A&E attendance with chest pain – discharge letter, tests all normal and reassured.
FBC, U&E, LFT, TFTs, GGT, CRP, HbA1c, ESR and coeliac screen all normal 1 month ago.
How to act 	Hesitant and quiet.
PC 	‘It’s my bowels again, Doctor.’
History 	You go to the toilet three times every morning.
Your bowels are loose (not watery) but then they settle down. No other GI symptoms.
No red fags – no weight loss, no bleeding and no change in bowels.
You have seen previous doctors and ‘they said it is irritable bowel’.
You have been struggling with fnancial pressures.
Your children want to go to university.
You have no thoughts of hurting yourself or anyone else.
You have no features of depression, only worry. You eat and sleep okay.
Social 	You work at an electronics store. At work, your concentration is good.
You exercise to keep healthy. Your parents are elderly, which upsets you.
Your relationship with your wife is good. She knows you worry.
Children aged 15 and 14. You do not drink much alcohol. No drugs.
ICE 	Deep down you think this must be due to stress.
You ofen think when alone and especially on waking.
Toughts include fnancial worry and waiting to be told you have a life-limiting illness.
Lots of things remind you of this: adverts and articles.
You think about death a lot and it frightens you. It can make you cry.
Your chest can become tight, you feel sweaty and can feel breathless. You recently had
an episode of chest pain which frightened you, so you went to A&E and were told it was
muscular.
You had a mild pain in your lower chest which had no features of cardiac, gastric or res-
piratory disease. You accepted this but you fear you have bowel cancer, perhaps near the
top of the tummy because of the recent chest pain.
If the doctor senses you are quiet say: ‘Well, you get to forty.’
If asked what you meant you say: A mid-life crisis.’ If asked about it further tell the doc-
tor – ‘You hear of people going to the doctor and 6 weeks later they are dead.’
No one you know has had this happen. You don’t know what to do.
You wondered whether you should have a colonoscopy.
You expect the doctor will restart your mebeverine. It doesn’t help.
You would follow any guidance from the doctor.
Examination 	If the doctor examines you the abdomen is normal. Observations normal.
Mental Health – 1

-- 334 of 575 --

➠ 320
Learning Points 	Anxiety
Open questions help the real problem to surface. Red fags steer diagnosis. Risk assessments guide man-
agement. ‘Has anything else crossed your mind?’ was useful here to avoid missing his multiple ICE. Tere
were no red fags for lower GI symptoms, but this fear needed to be acknowledged and resolved.
NICE guidance – the stepped care model for the management of generalised anxiety.1
Step 1 	‘Identification and assessment; education about GAD and treatment options; active
monitoring.’1
Step 2 	‘Low-intensity psychological interventions: individual non-facilitated self-help, individual
guided self-help and psychoeducational groups.’ 1
Step 3 	‘High-intensity psychological intervention (CBT/applied relaxation) or a drug treatment.’ 1
SSRIs. Side efects: upset stomach and may increase anxiety initially.
Propranolol may be required in addition. Care of contraindications, e.g. asthma.
Alternative drug treatments: SNRI and pregabalin.
Benzodiazepines may be used for crisis management only.
Step 4 	‘Highly specialist treatment, such as complex drug and/or psychological treatment regi-
mens; input from multi-agency teams, crisis services, day hospitals or inpatient care.’ 1
A simplifed version of the CBT model adapted from Williams2 and Williams and Garland3 can be used in
whole or in part even in a normal length consultation afer excluding red fags for the physical causes. Tis
model helps patients to visualise why their physical symptoms are linked to their anxiety and not a sign of
something sinister. It is also a great way of summarising and demonstrating you have listened.
Environment
Thought
Behaviour 	Emotion
Physical
Waking up,
time alone
Financial, age,
future, terminal
illness
Bowels loose,
no energy, tight chest,
hyperventilate, tight throat,
tingling ÿngers and sweaty
Tearful,
no enjoyment,
fear
Stay in bed,
poor motivation
Mental Health – 1

-- 335 of 575 --

➠ 321
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Jessica Miller 	24 years 	F
PMH 	Depression diagnosed 3 months ago
Medications 	Sertraline 50 mg daily
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigation
Household 	No household members registered

-- 336 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Depression Review
Open ☐ 	Tank you for phoning. How have you been since starting the sertraline?
Sense ☐ 	You seem very quiet today.
ICE ☐ 	What has been going through your mind? Tell me what worries you? Is there anything particular
you were hoping I might suggest or do today?
History ☐ 	Please take me back to the beginning. When do you think you started to feel this way? What was
happening in your life at the time? How is the job going? I’m sorry to hear that. Please tell me
about your family. Are you close to them? Can you confde in anyone? Do you live with anyone?
Have you felt this way before? Tell me what happened then. What helped? Have you been able
to take the sertraline regularly, each day? Any side efects?
Curious ☐ 	What does your mum think? What have you told her? What haven’t you told her? Are people at
work aware? Do you have any difcult thoughts? Or thoughts you can not explain?
Flags ☐ 	What is your sleeping pattern like? Do you wake with an alarm? Are you able to enjoy activities?
How is your concentration? What comes to mind when you think about the future? Are you
eating? Any thoughts of not wanting to be alive? Hurting yourself or suicide? Have you ever
hurt yourself or tried to end your life? Have you made any plans to? Do you think you might?
Could you tell someone about these thoughts if they became stronger? Any thoughts of hurting
another person? How much alcohol do you drink? Do you take any drugs?
Impact ☐ 	How do you spend your days? And what about when you are not at work?
SummarICE ☐ 	So to summarise, you have been feeling this way for 6 months now, impacting on your energy
levels. You have had upsetting thoughts of how you could end your life but have made no plans
to do this as you do not want to upset your mum. You started sertraline 3 months ago and don’t
feel any diferent at all. You are wondering if they are working and whether we should change
them. Work has been tough lately.
Impression ☐ 	I wonder if we should increase the dose of tablets? Sertraline is an efective drug for depression
but takes time to work and ofen a higher dose than 50 mg is needed.
Experience ☐ 	Do you know anything about the causes of depression?
Explanation ☐ 	Causes can include new challenges in your life or a chemical imbalance in the brain. Te ser-
traline helps with this but it does take time and you need to keep taking them: 50 mg is a good
starting dose but I think we should now increase that to 100 mg daily.
Empathy ☐ 	It is very hard to move away from those you love for both you and your mum.
Options ☐ 	Depression can prevent you from looking afer yourself and from performing well at work. It
sounds as if your mum would like you to go home; have you considered this? Tat sounds sen-
sible. Going home may provide time to decide together what to do in the longer term. What do
you think? When it comes to depression there are things that you can do to help, such as getting
more exercise and eating well, things I can help with, for example increasing the medication,
and other people, such as your parents or counsellors, can give you support. You may fnd that
returning to a happy and caring environment will help you feel better, but it may be that you
need a little more help. It seems you are sufering signifcantly at the moment so we need to work
out a plan which is best for you. What are your thoughts regarding increasing antidepressants
or talking therapies? I suggest that I issue a work note for 4 weeks. Would you like the number
of a counsellor? Would you be interested in some online help?
Empower ☐ 	What exercise could you do? Is there anyone else who could help you?
Future ☐ 	Can we catch up in a couple of weeks? Would you like me to talk with your mum? We need to
make sure you are safe and so if your mum is aware of what thoughts you have had she can help
you… would it be okay if I explained to her what you have told me?
Specifcs ☐ 	If you decide to stay with your mum, can you book another telephone appointment to let me
know and so we can discuss the ongoing plan? Avoid alcohol as it lowers mood.
Safety net ☐ 	If you feel your mood is dropping or you ever have thoughts of hurting yourself, call a GP, me
if available, but there is always a GP on call here. If the surgery is closed there is 111 or the
Samaritans. You could even go to A&E. Here are all the contact numbers.
➠ 322
Mental Health – 2

-- 337 of 575 --

Patient’s Story 	Depression Review
➠ 323
Doctor’s notes Jessica Miller, 24 years. PMH: depression diagnosed 3 months ago. Medications: sertraline
50 mg daily.
How to act 	Quite short sentences. Your depression makes it hard work for the doctor to retrieve infor-
mation from you. Ofen initially answering, ‘I don’t know.’
PC 	Afer a pause… ‘I don’t know what’s wrong with me. Te tablets aren’t working.’
History 	You started to feel this way when you moved for your job about 6 months ago. No physical
symptoms but you have no energy. No psychotic features. Anhedonia and hopelessness.
You felt like this in the past, whilst doing your GCSEs, and were seen by the school coun-
sellor – you found this helpful. You saw the GP 3 months ago and were started on sertraline.
You have been taking the tablets regularly and not missed any. No side efects from the
tablets. You are struggling at work and making mistakes. You have no features of psychosis.
Risk: 	You have had occasional thoughts of not wanting to be alive. You sometimes think
it would be good if you didn’t wake up in the morning.
You drink some alcohol. You take no drugs. No thoughts of hurting others.
Never self-harmed.
You have never made a plan to harm yourself.
Toughts have included jumping of a bridge or taking an overdose.
If the doctor asks whether you intend to do this say, ‘I don’t know,’ and if they ask
if you would tell someone say, ‘yes but I won’t do that’.
Protective factor:
You are very close to your mum and you would hate to upset her by committing
suicide.
Social 	You work in marketing. You have been late for work as you struggle to get out of bed,
despite being awake since 4–5 a.m. Your boss is nice and told you to come to the GP. You
have fallen out with your fatmates over bills. You moved here for work 6 months ago.
You are eating less. You can’t think about cooking.
You spend your days in your room watching TV.
You don’t see your friends. You have no hobbies.
You do not exercise. You confde in your mum.
Your parents live 4 hours away. You miss them. Tey want you to go home.
Your mum is worried. She speaks to you on the phone every night.
ICE 	You are not sure why you feel like this. You are not worried about anything.
You don’t know what to expect today.
You accept a work note and a prescription for an increased dose of antidepressants.
You will go on walks with your mum. You will also see your local vicar.
If ofered, accept a referral to counselling services.
You give consent for the GP to speak with your mum if the GP ofers this.
Mental Health – 2

-- 338 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Depression
Recommend a few suggestions tailored to their needs and capacity. Provide a list of the suggestions and
contact numbers for organisations. You may have a collection of books you can lend. Structure your man-
agement plan: you can do, I (GP) can do, others can do and other resources. Depending on how much the
patient can absorb.
‘Tings that you can do: a healthy sleep and meal regime to give you energy, avoid alcohol which lowers mood,
and exercise every day should help to make you feel better. I can help with providing suggestions, monitoring
and prescribing medication if needed. Other people who can help may include family, friends or professionals.
You could contact MIND who will advise on local support groups. I suggest arranging counselling if you feel
there are emotions or experiences you want to talk about. Tere are other useful resources, websites such as
MoodGym or Mindfulness. Tere are helpful books also, such as Living in the Moment: with Mindfulness
Meditations by Anna Black. I have a list of all of these suggestions and here are the contact numbers.’
NICE guidance –The stepped care model for the management of depression.1
Step 1 	‘Assessment, support, psychoeducation, active monitoring and referral for further assessment
and interventions.’1
Step 2 	‘Low-intensity psychosocial interventions (self-help CBT or structured group physical activity
programme), psychological interventions, medication and referral for further assessment and
interventions.’1
Step 3 	‘Medication, high-intensity psychological interventions (e.g. CBT or behavioural couples ther-
apy), combined treatments, collaborative care (‘Only for depression where the person also has a
chronic physical health problem and associated functional impairment’1) and referral for further
assessment and interventions.’1
Step 4 	‘Medication, high-intensity psychological interventions, electroconvulsive therapy, crisis service,
combined treatments, multiprofessional and inpatient care.’1
Duration of treatment of medication therapy
First episode of depression: continue for 6 months afer the depression has improved.
Second episode: continue for at least 2 years.1
Combining drug medication in the patient resistant to frst-line therapy needs careful consideration and
‘should only normally be started in primary care in consultation with a consultant psychiatrist’.1
Be aware of:
Serotonin syndrome – see https://patient.info/doctor/Serotonin-Syndrome
Malignant neuroleptic syndrome – see https://patient.info/doctor/neuroleptic-malignant-syndrome
➠ 324
Mental Health – 2

-- 339 of 575 --

➠ 325
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Andrea Lockwood 	36 years 	F
PMH 	15 years old – under Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services for
depression.
17–20 years old – under secondary care for major depression and self-harm.
Discharged by mental health services for repeated failure to attend.
Mid-20s – managed by GP for moderate depression and superfcial wrist
cutting.
Overdose of paracetamol aged 27 years, seen by Crisis Team and discharged.
Termination of pregnancy 29 years old, referred to counselling team. Disclosed
a history of sexual abuse as a child (by stepfather), declined to inform police.
Further episode of severe depression in early 30s, suicidal ideation but not
attempts, wrist cutting, referred to secondary care but repeatedly failed to
attend appointment. Discharged back to primary care.
Medications 	Sertraline 50 mg daily.
Several courses of antidepressants in the past including fuoxetine,
sertraline, mirtazapine.
Allergies 	No information.
Consultations 	GP appointment 4 weeks ago:
‘Becoming depressed again, feeling low. Not sleeping or eating well.
Got into trouble at work. Only had the job for 4 weeks when got into
an argument with a colleague, resulting in her quitting the job on the
spur of the moment. Feels colleague was out to get her. Worried about
money. Lives alone, no local family. Finds it hard to keep friends, says
no close friends. Has a nice neighbour who looks in on her occasionally.
Having feeting thoughts of suicide, no plans or attempts. Has been
cutting wrists again, superfcial wrist wounds seen.’
Plan: Restart sertraline, TCI 3–4 weeks for review. Crisis team number
given to patient and worsening advice given.
Investigations 	No information
Household 	No household contacts

-- 340 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Personality Disorder
Open ☐ 	Can you tell me a bit more about how you feel? Tell me your story. Tat sounds tough.
(Pause) How have you been since you last saw the GP?
Impact ☐ 	Has the way you are feeling caused you any difculties in life recently?
ICE ☐ 	Do you have any thoughts about what could be causing all these problems for you? Are you
worried about anything specifc? Was there anything specifc you hoped we would achieve
today or anything in particular that you wanted?
History ☐ 	I’m sorry you are feeling so low. Is your mood afecting how you sleep? Or eat? Are you
able to go out and enjoy yourself? I can see from your records that you have had problems
with your mood in the past; do you feel that you are always battling with low mood? Can
you tell me more about what contact you have had with health professionals? Do you think
your mood afects how you develop or keep relationships? Who is in your life? How do
you get on? Has anyone in the family sufered with mood problems? Have you ever been
in trouble with the police? Do you drink alcohol? Or smoke? Have you ever taken illegal
drugs? Do you fnd that sometimes you act without thinking things through? Has this had
any bad consequences for you? Do you ever feel paranoid, as if people are watching you or
out to get you? Do you ever hear or see things which other people cannot?
Flags ☐ 	You told the GP last time that you had been harming yourself; is this still the case? How
ofen? Is it possible to explain what drives you to cut yourself? Does it make you feel better
aferwards? Have you ever felt so bad that you have wanted to end your life? Have you made
plans to end your life? What would stop you from ending your life? Do you know where
you can get help if you do feel suicidal?
Sense ☐ 	I sense that life can be very complex for you at times, would you agree?
SummarICE ☐ 	So you feel you have had problems with your mood since you were a teenager. Tis may
have begun as a result of abuse you sadly sufered as a child. You have seen lots of diferent
doctors and you have felt this has been without much success. You fnd it difcult to main-
tain relationships and can sometimes act on impulse without thinking of the consequences.
You fnd cutting yourself releases tension and makes you feel better. You do have thoughts
that it would be better if you weren’t around but haven’t recently made plans to end your
life. You would like help and for a medical team to stick with you. Is there anything I have
missed or you would like to add?
Explanation ☐ You’re clearly sufering with an episode of depression at present, Andrea, but I do wonder if
the problem runs a little deeper and if there may be another explanation as to why you have
had such complex problems in your life. I wonder if you may have a personality disorder.
Have you heard of this? Our personalities are quite complex but in general they are a set
of qualities which control how we think, feel and behave. Our personalities develop in a
particular way partly due to our genes but also due to our experiences and upbringing. In
some people, their personality develops in such a way that it causes them great difculties
in life. Tese difculties vary greatly but can be with their mood, their relationships or their
behaviour, such as committing crimes. Do you think this could be the case for you?
Recommend ☐ I would like to refer you to our complex needs team who can assess you to see if they think
you may have a personality disorder. If they do, they can help you by providing a commu-
nity mental health nurse who will visit you. Tey can also put you in touch with a support
worker and can help you access talking therapies. Sometimes medication, such as sertraline,
can also help but I would like to be guided by their expertise. Is that okay?
Empathy ☐ 	I realise this is a lot to take in and may be a bit scary; how do you feel about it?
Future ☐ 	Let’s continue the sertraline for now as it’s helping and I will do the referral.
Specifcs ☐ 	Can I talk to you again in 3 weeks? Please book an appointment online or by phoning reception.
Safety net ☐ 	If you are worsening in the meantime, please let me know. If you feel suicidal you can phone
the Samaritans, but if you feel in danger call the crisis team. Tanks for talking to me today.
Mental Health – 3	
➠ 326

-- 341 of 575 --

➠ 327	
Patient’s Story 	Personality Disorder
Doctor’s notes Andrea Lockwood, 36 years. PMH: see below. Medications: sertraline 50 mg daily. Past
medication: fuoxetine, sertraline, mirtazapine.
GP appointment 4 weeks ago: ‘Becoming depressed again, feeling low. Not sleeping or eating
well. Got into trouble at work. Only had job for 4 weeks when got into an argument with
a colleague, resulting in her quitting the job on the spur of the moment. Feels colleague
was out to get her. Worried about money. Lives alone, no local family. Finds it hard to
keep friends, says no close friends. Has a nice neighbour who looks in on her occasionally.
Having feeting thoughts of suicide, no plans or attempts. Has been cutting wrists again,
superfcial wrist wounds seen. Plan: restart sertraline, TCI 3–4 weeks for review. Crisis team
number given to patient and worsening advice given.’
How to act 	Low.
PC 	‘So, things aren’t much better, Doctor.’
History 	You had a tough start in life as your natural father was an alcoholic so your home life was
chaotic. Your father died following an accident related to alcohol. Your mother was dev-
astated but over time came to terms with what had happened. Your mother sufered with
anxiety and depression and was once hospitalised due to her depression. She met a new
partner whom you did not like. You disclosed to a counsellor that your stepfather abused
you when you were 13 years old but you do not want to go to the police about this now. He
and your mother are separated and you do not see him anymore. Your relationship with
your mother is variable. It’s good at the moment. Over the years you have seen many health
professionals about low mood. Tey never help you. You have repeatedly self-harmed and
on one occasion took a paracetamol overdose, although you didn’t really intend to die.
You fnd that you can make friends easily but ofen the friendships fail due to arguments;
you ofen feel that the friend doesn’t really care about you. You can be impulsive. You have
never had a job which lasted more than a few months. You will spend money that you don’t
have and react to situations without thinking of the consequences. You have once been in
trouble with the police due to shoplifing, and you were let of with a caution. At present
you feel low and worthless. You have been cutting your wrists as this gives you a sense of
relief. You have had thoughts that it would be better if you weren’t alive but haven’t made
plans to end your life. Te sertraline has helped a little.
You have no symptoms of psychosis. You want your life to get better and feel you need help
from people who ‘won’t let me down’. People always give you a tablet then pass you on to
someone else. You would like continuity of care. You call the Samaritans regularly. Tis
helps to release anger if you don’t want to cut yourself.
Social 	Currently unemployed, you were given a ‘Med 3 ft note’ by the GP in your last appointment.
You drink alcohol occasionally. You smoke 15 cigarettes a day. No illicit drug use. You live
alone in a rented fat.
ICE 	You think you are depressed. You would like to continue sertraline. You are open to the
idea of seeing a specialist if the doctor suggests this.
Mental Health – 3

-- 342 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Personality Disorder
Personality disorders can be quite difcult to identify but be suspicious in patients with repeating patterns
of behaviour, such as self-harm, emotional instability, criminal activity, problems maintaining relationships
or difculties functioning in day-to-day life (unable to keeps jobs, etc.). Personality disorders are thought
to develop due to a combination of genetic factors and ‘nurture’ factors (early life experiences, abuse). Our
personalities have normally formed between our mid-teens to early 20s. Although our personalities cannot
be changed (hence personality disorders are ofen labelled untreatable), intervention can help patients cope
with their difculties and enable them to function better and have a more stable and fulflling life. NICE
recommends a structured approach to assessment and management. Psychotherapy can be efective and
drug therapy may help in some cases (e.g. antidepressants to treat depressive symptoms). Antipsychotics or
sedatives can be used for short-term crisis management but are not advised long term.1–3
Below is a summary of the diferent categories of personality disorder and their typical features. From http://
www.rcpsych.ac.uk/healthadvice/problemsdisorders/personalitydisorder.aspx
Cluster A: (‘Odd or Eccentric’) 	Features:
Paranoid 	Suspicious, feelings of persecution, feel easily rejected, hold
grudges4
Schizoid 	Emotionally cold, prefer being alone, ‘have a rich fantasy world’4
Schizotypal 	‘Eccentric behaviour, odd ideas, diffculties with thinking,
lack of emotion or inappropriate reactions’,4 visual or auditory
hallucinations, may have features of schizophrenia4
Cluster B (‘Dramatic, Emotional and
Erratic’)
Features:
Antisocial or Dissocial 	Lack of empathy, easily frustrated, aggressive, criminal activity,
diffculty forming close relationships, impulsive, lack of guilt, do
not learn from unpleasant experiences4
Borderline or Emotionally Unstable 	Impulsive, hard to control emotions, features of depression/
low mood/low self-worth, self-harm, diffculty maintaining
relationships, may feel paranoid, can have auditory
hallucinations4
Histrionic 	Over-dramatic, self-centred, suggestible, worry about
appearance, look for excitement and new things, and can be
seductive4
Narcissistic 	Strong sense of self-importance, desire success, power and
intellectual greatness, crave attention but don’t reciprocate, take
advantage of others and don’t return favours4
Cluster C (’Anxious and Fearful’) 	Features:
Obsessive–Compulsive (Anankastic) 	Worry, doubt, perfectionists, rigid routines, cautious and
preoccupied with detail, diffculty adapting, judgemental,
sensitive to criticism, obsessional thoughts, high moral
standards4
Avoidant (Anxious/Avoidant) 	Very anxious/tense, insecure, feels inferior, extremely sensitive
to criticism, have to be liked4
Dependent 	Passive, can’t make decisions, submissive, diffculty coping with
daily tasks, feel hopeless and abandoned4
➠ 328
Mental Health – 3

-- 343 of 575 --

➠ 329
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Chloe Livingstone-Smith 	28 years 	F
PMH 	Failed forceps delivery and emergency lower segment caesarean
section 2 weeks ago
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Midwife visit at home yesterday.
‘Baby doing well, no jaundice, yellow stool nappies. Regained
birth weight. Forceps mark fading. Breastfeeding. Up 2-hourly in
the night. Mum tired. Not been out, says worried baby will pick
up an infection, made an odd comment about the government,
seems a little tearful, suggested talks to GP, asked husband to
make her an appointment tomorrow.’
Investigations 	No information
Household 	Damian Smith 	32 years 	M
James Smith 	2 weeks 	M

-- 344 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Postnatal Psychosis
Open ☐ 	I see you had a baby 2 weeks ago, congratulations! Is James your baby’s name? How has it
been going? How are you? How is James? What has been the biggest challenge?
History ☐ 	How was your delivery? Is this your frst child? How are you getting on with feeding? Is
James sleeping well? Have you managed to get any rest? Who’s at home? What support are
you getting?
Sense ☐ 	You said that you couldn’t talk for long on the phone; is there anything particular making
you feel the need to rush?
Flags ☐ 	Have you been feeling particularly sad or worried since James was born? Why do you think
he may be getting an infection? Is there anything that has happened to make you think the
government wants to take him away? Do you believe that the government is speaking to
you or sending you messages? Do you worry that the government can hear your thoughts
or interfere with your thoughts? Do you ever hear or see things which other people cannot?
Have you ever had thoughts about harming James? Or harming yourself? Have you done
anything to protect James from the government?
Risk ☐ 	Do you know if any other woman in your family has had problems with their mood afer
having a baby? Have you ever had problems with your mood before?
ICE ☐ 	I see that your husband made the telephone appointment for you today, but had you any
thoughts about what you would like to happen? You are clearly worried that James may
become ill and that the government may take him away; would you like my help with this?
Experience ☐ 	Have you ever come across a situation where a mother has become unwell with mood
problems afer having a baby?
Curious ☐ 	What does your husband think? Is he worried about you or James?
SummarICE ☐ 	So you had your baby, James, 2 weeks ago. You had a tough time during the delivery but
did recover well. Now, however, you feel unable to take James out of the house due to fear
of him becoming unwell or that the government will take him of you as you believe it
thinks you are a bad mother. You have been avoiding other people and have been keeping
James clean by bathing him 3 times a day and changing his nappy every hour. You have
unplugged the TV to stop the government sending you messages and to stop it spying on
you. You would like help to protect yourself and James but aren’t sure whom you can trust.
Is there anything else you would like to tell me?
Explanation ☐ It seems to me, Chloe, that you may be sufering from a condition that can develop afer
having a baby and causes the mother to have severe mood problems. Te condition is called
postpartum psychosis. It sounds like your grandmother may have had the same problem.
InCludE ☐ 	Your feelings of being scared and anxious are very real but they are because you are unwell,
not because anyone wants to take James away from you.
Recommend ☐ I would really like to get you some help with this today. To get the best help, I would like
to speak to our specialist colleagues at the hospital and ask them to see you today.
Empathy ☐ 	I understand this is a scary prospect and it must seem that we are ganging up on you but I
would really like to get you some help.
Future ☐ 	Tere is a special ward at the hospital where you and James can go until you are feeling
better. James will stay with you so you don’t need to worry that someone will take him away.
How does that sound? Can I call your husband and ask him to come home to be with you?
We can then arrange for you to go up to the hospital.
Safety net ☐ 	Is your friend able to stay with you until your husband arrives? If you feel worried or change
your mind about seeing the hospital doctor, let us know and we can talk it through again.
Specifcs ☐ 	When I phone your husband, may I explain to him what you have told me? When you are
discharged, please let me know and I will come and visit you and James at home.
➠ 330
Mental Health – 4

-- 345 of 575 --

➠ 331	
Patient’s Story 	Postnatal Psychosis
Doctor’s notes Chloe Livingstone-Smith, 28 years. PMH: failed forceps delivery and ELSCS 2 weeks ago.
Medications: none. Midwife visit yesterday: ‘Baby doing well, no jaundice, yellow stool
nappies. Regained birth weight. Forceps mark fading. Breastfeeding. Up 2-hourly in the
night. Mum tired. Not been out, says worried baby will pick up an infection, made an odd
comment about the government, seems a little tearful, suggested talks to GP, asked husband
to make her an appointment tomorrow.’
How to act 	Agitated. You want to reassure the doctor that all is well; however, you open up to the doctor
when he/she explores your thoughts.
PC 	‘Can we make this quick, Doctor, I can’t talk for long.’
History 	You had your frst baby, James, 2 weeks ago. You were induced due to being overdue and
had a torrid time in hospital. Te induction took a long time and resulted in a failed forceps
delivery followed by an emergency caesarean section as James had become distressed in the
womb. You were in hospital a couple of days recovering. James needed to be monitored as
he had inhaled some meconium and the doctors were worried about infection. Since being
discharged, you have become extremely anxious about James becoming unwell, especially
that he will get an infection. You change his nappy hourly to keep him clean and bath him
three times a day. You worry that the government is trying to take him away from you.
You think that it sends messages through the television to you, telling you to give him up
as you can’t look afer him properly and keep him safe and clean. You have unplugged the
television and won’t allow your husband to watch it. James is at home in another room and
you have booked the phone consultation as you didn’t want the government to snatch him
if you went out. Your husband has told you that you need a telephone consultation check-up
to see how you are getting on afer the caesarean. He has booked the appointment for you.
You remember your mother telling you that her mother went into an ‘asylum’ afer giving
birth to her. A friend is with you now, holding James whilst you phone the doctor. You have
no thoughts of harming yourself or anyone else. You want to keep the baby safe. You trust
your husband and friend.
Social 	You are a designer for a large fashion company; previously you have travelled the world
through your work. You married a photographer, whom you met whilst working on a
fashion show. Your husband was keen to have children as he is a little older than you. You
weren’t sure at frst as you didn’t want to take a lot of time of work but were happy when
you fell pregnant. Your parents live in Miami, so you don’t see them ofen. You are an only
child. Your in-laws live fairly locally and have been helping out.
ICE 	You believe that your baby will be taken from you by the government as it thinks you are an
unft mother. You love your baby and have been doing everything you can to protect him,
especially from infection. You do not want to go back to hospital. You think the doctor may
be on the government’s side but, if he/she explains kindly and empathetically, you agree to
his/her plan. You are happy for the doctor to speak to your husband on the phone.
Mental Health – 4

-- 346 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Postnatal Psychosis
Mood changes afer delivery are common but we must all be on the lookout for women who may be strug-
gling with a mental illness.
‘Baby blues’ – Very common (>50%). Low mood, irritability, anxiety and tearfulness are common symptoms.
Usually occurs day 3–4 postnatally and has usually resolved by day 10. Be suspicious if symptoms persist
beyond 2 weeks.
Postnatal depression – Occurs in 10–15% of women. Typically begins within the frst 8 weeks but can occur
several months later. Ofen there is a history of depression during pregnancy, although this isn’t always
picked up. More severe and longer lasting than ‘baby blues’. Same symptoms as with non-pregnancy related
depression, i.e. low mood, tearful, changes in sleep, changes in appetite, anxiety and anhedonia. May be
some more specifc symptoms related to having a new baby, e.g. difculty bonding with the baby, lack of
emotional connection to the baby, feeling guilty for not loving the baby enough, resenting the baby for the
way they feel, thoughts of harming the baby. As with all patients with depression, it is essential to assess any
risk posed by the patients to themselves or others. In postnatal depression, be especially alert to risk to the
baby or other children in the household.
Screening questions – NICE recommends the following screening questions to help identify PND. ‘During
the past month, have you ofen been bothered by feeling down, depressed or hopeless? During the past month,
have you ofen been bothered by having little interest or pleasure in doing things?’ Any positive response should
lead to further assessment, possibly using a tool such as the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. NICE
also recommends screening for anxiety with the following two questions (GAD-2):
Over the last 2 weeks, how ofen have you been bothered by feeling nervous, anxious or on edge?
Over the last 2 weeks, how ofen have you been bothered by not being able to stop or control worrying?1
Depending on the severity of the symptoms, the mother may be able to care for herself and her baby with-
out much extra support, but in severe cases the mother may struggle to complete simple tasks. In milder
cases, health visitors, community mental health teams, etc. can be called upon to help treat the patient in
the community setting, with support from the family, partner or a carer. In more severe cases, involvement
of the perinatal psychiatry team or even admission to a specialist mother and baby unit may be required.
Where possible, the mother and baby should be kept together.
Postpartum psychosis (puerperal psychosis – Much rarer, occurring in 0.1%. Typically begins suddenly
within the frst 2 weeks following delivery. Symptoms vary but include severe depression, mania, halluci-
nations and delusions. It may occur in a woman with no history of mental illness, but the risk is increased
if there is a personal or family history of mental illness (particularly of postpartum psychosis). Tere are
frequently delusions about the baby: ‘the baby is evil’. Te patient may demonstrate typical features of psy-
chotic illness, e.g. pressure of speech, knight’s move thinking, delusions (e.g. paranoia, grandiose thoughts
or ideas of persecution) or auditory/visual hallucinations.
Postpartum psychosis is a psychiatric emergency and NICE recommends referral for immediate assess-
ment (within 4 hours) and, where possible, the mother should be treated in a specialist mother and baby
unit. Tankfully the prognosis is good with the worst symptoms usually improving around 12 weeks and
the majority of cases resolving between 6 and 12 months. However, there is a 50% chance of recurrence in
future pregnancies.
Antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinaemia
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for helpful advice when commencing an
antipsychotic.
➠ 332
Mental Health – 4

-- 347 of 575 --

➠ 333
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Eleanor Cartwright 	15 years 	F
PMH 	Constipation aged 4 years
Lower respiratory tract infection 11 years
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No known allergies
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No information
Household 	Brian Cartwright 	55 years 	M
Faith Cartwright 	54 years 	F
Attends with mother.

-- 348 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Eating Disorder
Open ☐ 	Hello Ellie. Please tell me what led you to book the appointment today? What have you
talked about at home? How do you feel about this? How do you feel about your health?
Faith, what are your thoughts please? Have you noticed anything else that has worried you?
Impact ☐ 	Ellie, have you noticed a change to your body? Have things at home changed? What about
at school? Faith, have you noticed a change in Ellie? Have teachers?
History ☐ 	Ellie, have you had any medical problems? Do you take any medicines? Who is at home?
Faith – may I speak to Ellie alone briefy? It is always helpful, thank you. Ellie – how are
things at home? What is your mum worried about, do you think? What do you like to do
when you are not at school? How is school? Have you noticed a change to any parts in your
body? Going to the toilet, headaches or periods? Are you pleased or is that a worry?
Curious ☐ 	Ellie, your mum says you sometimes get angry. What makes you feel this way?
Risk ☐ 	Is anyone at school horrible? Because your periods have stopped, I have to make sure you
are not pregnant: do you have a boyfriend? Have you had sex? Has anyone made you feel
uncomfortable or hurt you? Do you take drugs or drink alcohol?
Flags ☐ 	Do you feel unhappy or tearful? Do you sleep okay? Can you concentrate? Do you ever
wish you were not alive? Have you tried to hurt yourself? Do you ever see or hear things
that others can’t? Or receive instructions that others are not aware of? Are you happy for
me to share with your mum your feelings and periods?
Sense ☐ 	Ellie and I have talked about her missed periods. I do sense you are very worried.
ICE ☐ 	Ellie, do you know why we are concerned? Is there anything you are worried about? When
you were waiting for the call-back, what did you think I might say? Faith, what are your
thoughts about what Ellie may be going through? What worries you most? Is there anything
else? Is there anything specifc you were hoping I would do today?
Examination ☐ Ellie – can you tell me what your height and weight are? Tank you. As your height is 165 cm
and your weight is 40 kg, it means that your BMI is 14.6, so you are very underweight.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, Ellie, you decided to change what foods you eat and exercise more over the
past 5 months. Since then, your parents and school teacher have been concerned about you
and especially afer your mum heard you being sick.
Experience ☐ 	Ellie, do you know the risks of losing weight? Faith, can you tell me more about what you
have read? Faith, have you come across this before?
Examination ☐ I would like to see you and your mum at the surgery later today please – to confrm your
height and weight, check your blood pressure and pulse, and feel your tummy and your
neck to make sure there is no other reason why you may have lost weight. Is that okay?
Recommend ☐ I would also like to do a full set of blood tests to check what may be out of balance including
your hormones, thyroid, sugar, liver and kidneys and blood cells and also a heart tracing
(ECG). Can you come in at 3.30 p.m. today?
Impression ☐ 	Ellie, it sounds as if you have decided that controlling your weight is really important to
you. Sometimes, without realising it, a person can lose too much weight as they continue to
focus on avoiding food and start to be sick to avoid absorbing food. Tis is called an eating
disorder and your weight is now at a dangerous level. What is going through your mind?
Explanation ☐ Te body needs nutrition to work. Periods stopping is a sign your body is not healthy.
InCludE ☐ 	Exercise is not safe at present as you may become extremely unwell if you lose more weight.
Recommend ☐ I would also like to write to the children’s psychiatry team who can help you be in control
again at a safe and healthy level.
Specifcs ☐ 	I will call you with the blood results and the children’s team should see you in the next week.
Safety net ☐ 	If either of you are concerned, don’t hesitate to speak to a doctor. Call 111 if we are closed.
➠ 334
Mental Health – 5

-- 349 of 575 --

➠ 335	
Patient’s Story 	Eating Disorder
Doctor’s notes Eleanor Cartwright, 15 years. PMH: constipation aged 4 years. LRTI aged 11 years.
Medications: none.
How to act 	Eleanor is quiet. Mother (Faith) is initially abrupt but then quiet also.
PC 	Faith 	‘I want to know what is wrong with Ellie. I’m very worried. She keeps to herself and
is getting angry when we try to talk to her. We just want to help you, Ellie!’
History 	Eleanor 	You don’t know what’s wrong and tell the doctor you don’t know why your
mother has made the telephone appointment. However, you are aware that your mum and
dad are watching you eat and don’t trust you. You sleep okay. You deny losing your appetite
or decreasing your meal size. You just eat healthier food. You are annoyed that your parents
have stopped you from exercising when you return home from school. You just want to be
healthy. It started when you realised that the other girls at swimming looked ‘better’ than
you. You felt ‘fat’ so just decided to eat better and exercise – that’s what everyone tells you
is good for you anyway so you don’t see the problem. You eat with your parents but feel
annoyed if they try to sneak extra food onto your plate. You hope to lose more weight as
you don’t think anything has changed since you started being healthier 5 months ago. You
do not use laxatives. You do not disclose to the doctor that you have started vomiting. You
have always been well and there is no family history. Your periods stopped 4 months ago.
You have never had sex. You have no other symptoms.
Faith 	You heard Ellie vomiting whilst the shower was running yesterday which is why you
have made the appointment today. Ellie has lost a lot of weight. Originally you thought this
was because her body was changing. When you were at college, a girl died from an eating
disorder. Ellie has lost contact with her friends.
Social 	Eleanor 	You are in all the top sets at the local school. Your mother is a journalist and you
don’t know what your father does exactly but he is always very busy. You get on ‘fne’. You
play the piano and the clarinet and have your grade 6 piano exam next month. You have
stopped liking school.
ICE 	Eleanor 	You don’t know why your mother has made the appointment but, if pushed for
an answer, your mum is watching what you are eating. You are not worried and expect
the doctor will tell you to eat more. You don’t like periods and you are thrilled they have
stopped.
Faith 	You believe Ellie is becoming very obsessed with her weight. You do not mention
the words anorexia but you do admit to ‘looking on the internet at problems with eating’.
However, you haven’t yet come to terms with Ellie having this problem. You are concerned
that Ellie has become a recluse and no longer goes out with her friends and her test results
have dropped. Te schoolteacher called you to say she was worried about Ellie’s weight.
Since this call last week, you have been watching Ellie. You feel very guilty and worry what
the school will think. You would like the doctor to tell Ellie that she cannot exercise until
she puts on more weight and to refer her for counselling. You are aware Ellie’s periods have
stopped and have talked about this.
Examination 	BMI 14.6. BP 90/60. HR 58 bpm. Abdomen sof, non-tender with no masses or organo-
megaly. No lymphadenopathy. HS normal. No palpable thyroid.
Mental Health – 5

-- 350 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Eating Disorder
Information taken from NICE Guideline NG69. Eating disorders: recognition and treatment. December 2020.1
Please refer to full guidance.
As well as an unusually low or high BMI or body weight for their age, other factors should raise
suspicion1
• 	Rapid weight loss 	• 	Atypical dental wear (e.g. erosion)
• 	Weight concerns and not overweight 	• 	Gastrointestinal symptoms
• 	Menstrual disturbances
Diagnosis
’Do not use single measures such as BMI or duration of illness to determine whether to ofer treatment for an
eating disorder.’
Assessment
should include1 Physical
Psychological
Social
Possibility of alcohol or substance abuse
Risk to self and risk of abuse
Need for emergency care in people whose physical health is compromised or who have a suicide
risk
Observations/
Investigations 	Heart rate, BP, weight.
Be vigilant for refeeding syndrome, bradycardia and hypotension.
Management 	Refer immediately to and be guided by your local community eating disorder team. Watchful
waiting not considered appropriate for suspected eating disorders.
Consider emergency admission if: ‘severe electrolyte imbalance, severe malnutrition, severe
dehydration or signs of incipient organ failure.’1
For adults, consider psychological treatment such as:
‘Individual eating-disorder-focused cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT-ED)
Maudsley Anorexia Nervosa TReatment for Adults (MANTRA)
Specialist supportive clinical management (SSCM)’1
‘ 	Advise people with an eating disorder who are misusing laxatives or diuretics that laxatives and
diuretics do not reduce calorie absorption and so do not help with weight loss [and] to gradually
reduce and stop laxative or diuretic use.’1
Regular medical and dental reviews if vomiting.1
Osteoporosis risk – ‘Advise people with anorexia nervosa and osteoporosis or related bone disor-
ders to avoid high-impact physical activities and activities that signifcantly increase the chance
of falls or fractures.’1
‘Advise people with an eating disorder who are exercising excessively to stop doing so.’1
‘Monitor growth and development in children and young people with anorexia nervosa who
have not completed puberty (for example, not reached menarche or fnal height).’1
At least annual review if stable/remission.
Respect
confdentiality 	Hold discussions in places where confdentiality, privacy and dignity can be respected but explain
the limits of confdentiality, i.e. which professionals have access to information and when this
may be shared. For children or young people <16, respect Gillick competence.
➠ 336
Mental Health – 5

-- 351 of 575 --

CHAPTER 14 OVERVIEW
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology
➠ 337
Cases in this chapter 	Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Metabolic Problems and
Endocrinology
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Hyperglycaemia 	‘Recognise and manage metabolic
and endocrine emergencies’
‘Systems of care for people with
metabolic/endocrine conditions’
Case involves offering continuity of
care and follow-up after the acute
treatment of hyperglycaemia
Ketones, HONK and lactic acidosis
2 	Hyperparathyroidism 	‘Disorders of calcium metabolism,
including hypoparathyroidism,
hyperparathyroidism and
osteomalacia; association with
chronic kidney disease’
Hypercalcaemia differential
Differential diagnosis of raised PTH
3 	Tired All the Time 	‘Adrenal diseases including…
Cushing’s syndrome’
Cushing’s syndrome
4 	Hyperthyroidism 	‘Thyroid diseases including…
hyperthyroidism’
Managing hyperthyroidism fow
diagram
5 	Diabetes in Pregnancy 	‘Gestational diabetes’ 	Counselling pre-conception and
risks of diabetes in pregnancy
Extra
Notes
Antihyperglycaemics 	‘Medication in diabetes
management, including glucose
and lipid lowering therapies,
anti-platelets, ACE inhibitors and
antihypertensives; recommended
treatment targets; and insulin
regimes, administration and
dosages’
Antihyperglycaemics

-- 352 of 575 --

CHAPTER 14 REFERENCES
Hyperglycaemia
1. 	https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/diabetic-ketoacidosis/. May 2020.
Hyperparathyroidism
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/hyperparathyroidism-pro. Mar 2016.
2. 	NICE Guideline NG132. Hyperparathyroidism (primary): diagnosis, assessment and initial management. https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng132. May 2019.
Tired All the Time
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/cushings-syndrome-pro. Aug 2020.
Hyperthyroidism
1. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/hyperthyroidism/. Jan 2021.
2. 	British Tyroid Foundation leafet – ‘Your guide to hyperthyroidism’ and ‘Your guide to antithyroid drug treatment
to treat hyperthyroidism’.
Diabetes in Pregnancy
1. 	NICE guideline NG3. Diabetes in pregnancy: management from pre-conception to the postnatal period.
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng3. Dec 2020.
Antihyperglycaemics
1. 	NICE Guideline NG28. Type 2 diabetes: management. Dec 2020.
2. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/diabetes-type-2/prescribing-information/. May 2021.
3. 	https://patient.info/doctor/antihyperglycaemic-agents-used-for-type-2-diabetes
4. 	https://www.gov.uk/drug-safety-update/pioglitazone-risk-of-bladder-cancer
5. 	https://www.gov.uk/drug-safety-update/sglt2-inhibitors-updated-advice-on-increased-risk-of-lower-limb-amputa-
tion-mainly-toes
6. 	https://www.gov.uk/drug-safety-update/sglt2-inhibitors-updated-advice-on-the-risk-of-diabetic-ketoacidosis
Useful Resource
NICE Guideline NG28, Type 2 diabetes: management (Dec 2020) contains a very useful algorithm for blood
glucose lowering therapy in adults with type 2 diabetes.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 338
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology

-- 353 of 575 --

➠ 339
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Mary Owen 	35 years 	F
PMH 	Type 1 diabetes
Anxiety
IBS
Medications 	Insulin glargine, NovoRapid, citalopram and buscopan
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	DNA letter from hospital diabetes clinic
Investigations 	No information
Household 	No household members registered

-- 354 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Hyperglycaemia
Open ☐ 	Oh dear. In what way unwell? When did you last feel your normal self? Okay, take it from
that day and tell me what symptoms you noticed in sequence if you can. How is your general
health usually?
Flags ☐ 	How are your blood sugars at the moment? Do you have a ketone meter?
Risk ☐ 	Any symptoms that may suggest infection, for example a cough, sore throat, diarrhoea,
changes passing urine or tummy pain or abnormal vaginal discharge? Is it painful to pass
urine? Are you racing to the toilet? Or passing a small or large amount each time? Any
blood? Any rash, stifness of the neck or discomfort looking at the light?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think may have caused this? What is worrying you? What did you think I
might suggest today?
History ☐ 	Is the insulin regime appropriate for your lifestyle? Has everything been okay with taking
your insulin recently? Do you have any other medical problems? How is your anxiety? How
are your bowels at present? Do you work? Tell me more about work. Is anyone at home?
Are you in a relationship? ‘Not really?’
Curious ☐ 	You say you have been forgetting to take the insulin. Why might this be? Why are you
missing meals? You say you haven’t got time to worry about work: is everything okay? I’m
sorry your mother is not well.
Impact ☐ 	Have you been struggling with your normal day? Are you feeling low?
O/E ☐ 	I would like to check your BP, pulse, temperature, listen to your chest, feel your tummy and
do a fnger prick test for sugar and ketones. I think we also need a urine specimen from
you. Please could you pop to the toilet whilst I make a plan.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have felt unwell for 2 days. You believe you have a urine infection, are
frightened by your blood sugars being so high and thought I would suggest how to bring
them down.
Empathy ☐ 	It sounds like you are under stress physically and emotionally with a busy career, whilst
taking care of your mother to whom you are very close.
Impression ☐ 	Mary, I believe the raised blood sugar is likely due to a combination of stress and missing
insulin doses.
InCludE ☐ 	And, I agree, a urine infection may have contributed to this. Urine infections are more
likely afer having sex and with raised sugars. I believe the diagnosis is a urine infection
and diabetic ketoacidosis or DKA for short.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of this?
Explanation ☐ Because you do not have a good supply of insulin to move all that sugar into your muscles,
your body breaks down fat to make ketones.
Options ☐ 	You need to go to hospital for treatment through the veins otherwise you will be extremely
unwell.
InCludE ☐ 	Unfortunately, although I know this is what you hoped, we cannot give this care at home.
Is your mother a patient with us? What does she need? I can call your mother and suggest
arranging emergency care through the Single Point of Access Team whilst you are in hos-
pital. I will phone the medical team at the hospital to let them know you need to come in.
I will arrange for an ambulance to take you to hospital.
Future ☐ 	At the hospital, I expect you will be given fuids, insulin and antibiotics.
Empower ☐ 	When you are better, please return to see me to discuss your general health, support we
could ofer and changes to your insulin regime to suit your lifestyle better. I also recommend
going to the toilet afer sex to prevent water infections as this helps fush out the bacteria
that may be pushed up to the bladder during sex. Does this make sense?
Specifcs ☐ 	We can also prescribe a ketone meter and testing strips for you and book an appointment
with our PN to demonstrate how to use this.
Safety net ☐ 	If you feel unwell again, please don’t hesitate to speak to a doctor.
➠ 340
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 1

-- 355 of 575 --

➠ 341
Patient’s Story 	Hyperglycaemia
Doctor’s notes Mary Owen, 35 years. PMH: type 1 diabetes, anxiety and IBS.
Medications: Insulin glargine, NovoRapid, citalopram and Buscopan.
Consultations: DNA letter from hospital diabetes clinic.
How to act 	Slightly breathless and lacking in full concentration.
PC 	‘I keep being sick. I feel really unwell.’
History 	Two days ago you started feeling unwell and tired and started to develop stomach pain.
Tis morning you started vomiting with abdominal pain and a headache.
You have no rash and no fever. You have no neck stifness and no neurological symptoms.
If the doctor asks you about your breathing, you do feel more breathless but have no other
respiratory symptoms. Your blood sugar is 24.
‘I have been forgetting to take the insulin.’
Tis is usually because you are ‘always on the go’ and you have missed meals.
You have no fever, but you have been passing urine more frequently over the past week.
At frst you thought you needed to go but then nothing came out and now you are passing
much more urine, you have seen some blood and it is painful.
Your bowels are currently normal. Your anxiety has been controlled recently.
You have no other systemic symptoms. You do not have a ketone meter.
Social 	You live alone. You are ‘not really’ in a relationship. By this you mean you caught up with
an old boyfriend and had sex 10 days ago. You used condoms.
You work in advertising and have been successful in your career which can be stressful and
you have sufered with the stress of meeting deadlines and presentations to clients in the
past but ‘I don’t have time to worry about this now.’
You only drink minimal alcohol socially. You do not smoke.
Your mother was diagnosed with leukaemia 3 months ago and she is currently having
chemotherapy. You have been driving to see her afer work and at the weekends, sometimes
staying up with her through the night if she feels unwell.
She isn’t well at present but she made you come to the GP. You are very worried about your
mum and will go back to see her afer the consultation with the GP.
You need to return to be with your mother. She has no one else. However, if the doctor
explains why you need to go to hospital you will go. Your mother is a patient at the same
GP practice. Can the doctors help? She needs someone to check in on her and make sure
she has fuid and food tonight. She is very weak and in bed.
ICE 	You are worried about your health and you are frightened that your blood sugars are so
high. You believe you have a water infection afer having sex.
If the doctor mentions DKA, you have heard of it. You expect the doctor will tell you what
to do with your insulin today to bring your sugars down.
Examination 	HR 125 bpm. Sats 97%. BP 115/70. RR 19. Temperature 37.4 °C. Abdomen sof, generally
tender, no peritonism. Urine dipstick: leucocytes ++, nitrite +++,
protein +, blood ++, ketones ++++
BM = 30 mmol/L. Blood ketones = 3.1 mmol/L. Clinically dehydrated.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 1

-- 356 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Hyperglycaemia
The consultation
When asking if a patient has been compliant with medication, avoid sounding confrontational by asking: ‘Are
you taking your medicines correctly?’ Instead ask: ‘Has everything been okay with taking your medication
in the way the doctor prescribed?’ Tis is a much sofer question and more likely to yield a truthful answer.
Tis case challenges your skills at managing an emergency, practising holistically and negotiation. Without
a thorough social history and consideration of the patient’s concerns, it is unlikely that the key information
about the patient’s mother will be uncovered. It is essential to address this concern and ofer a solution to
allow your patient to accept potentially life-saving treatment.
Most areas have a ‘crisis team’ who can put emergency care in place (either at home or within a care home)
for short-term care issues. It is very important to invite the patient back to discuss ways in which she can
access help with her mother (both practically and fnancially) or at the very least signpost her to local carers’
support groups. It is likely she will need long-term support to prevent her own health sufering.
Ketones1 	<0.6 mmol/L 	A normal blood ketone value.
0.6–1.5 mmol/L 	Indicates that more ketones are being produced than normal. Test again
in 2 hours.
1.6–2.9 mmol/L 	A high level of ketones and could present a risk of ketoacidosis. It is
advisable to contact your diabetes team or GP for advice as soon as
possible.
≥3.0 mmol/L 	A very high risk of DKA which will require immediate medical care.1
HONK 	In type 2 diabetes: Hyperglycaemic Hyperosmolar Non-ketotic Coma.
Tis may present with extreme thirst, frequency, confusion and nausea and may progress
to coma if not treated promptly.
Lactic acidosis Diabetic patients may become acidotic especially if they are taking metformin.
➠ 342
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 1

-- 357 of 575 --

➠ 343
Doctor’s Notes
Patient
PMH
Medications
Avani Virdee 	57 years
No medical history
No current medications
F
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Bloods taken for routine health check
Investigations
3 weeks ago:
FBC 	normal
U&E/LFT/TFT
Lipids
HbA1c
normal
normal
normal
Household
eGFR 	80 mL/min/1.73 m 2
Corrected Ca 	2.73 mmol/L 	(2.2–2.6 mmol/L)
Vitamin D 	51 nmol/L 	(>50 nmol/L) = sufcient
(30–50 nmol/L) =
defciency
(<30 nmol/L) = severe
defciency
1 week ago:
PTH 	7.9 pmol/L 	(1.6–7.2 pmol/L)
No household members registered

-- 358 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Hyperparathyroidism
Open ☐ 	Mrs Virdee, thank you for phoning. What led you to have these tests taken?
Sense ☐ 	I can hear you are worried and keen to know your result.
Impression ☐ 	Te blood test has shown that a little gland in your neck may be releasing too much hor-
mone which increases the body’s calcium level. Tis is called hyperparathyroidism. Te
word ‘hyper’ means too much and the ‘parathyroid’ is a gland that sits in the neck. All your
other blood tests are normal. Tis can be serious as high calcium levels can make you feel
unwell. You are likely to have had it for many months but the good news is that we can
ofen cure this problem.
Experience ☐ 	Any questions so far? Calcium is good for you in moderation, like most things! Too much
calcium can cause you to feel unwell, but we don’t usually advise calcium restriction in this
condition.
History ☐ 	To help me work out the best course of action, can I ask a little more about you? Have you
felt unwell? Do you have any medical problems? Do you take any medicines?
Flags ☐ 	Are you more thirsty recently? Passing more urine than normal? Any pain at all? Are your
bowels okay? Have you ever had a kidney stone?
ICE ☐ 	Before you phoned today, did you have any thoughts about what may be wrong? Was there
anything else you were hoping to talk about today?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned you were tired; what might be causing that do you think?
SummarICE ☐ 	So to summarise, you were invited for a health check. We have detected a raised calcium
level and raised parathyroid hormone level, which is likely to be due to a condition called
hyperparathyroidism.
InCludE ☐ 	Apart from feeling tired, which may be due to your work and family commitments, you
feel well. You are keen to know what happens next. Have I got it right so far?
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate that any new diagnosis causes worry and apprehension.
O/E ☐ 	It would be helpful to examine you; to have a feel of your neck for lumps. Would you be
able to book an appointment soon for this? Tank you.
Recommend ☐ Assuming the examination confrms what I think, I would suggest we send a referral to the
endocrinologists, who are hormone specialists. Tankfully, this is a treatable problem.
Options ☐ 	We should also do a few more blood tests, when you come in, to recheck the calcium level
as we haven’t done this for 3 weeks. I usually also keep an eye on the kidneys to make sure
you are not dehydrated. I would also suggest a bone scan, because some calcium will have
come out of the bones, which can weaken them.
Empower ☐ 	You don’t need to reduce the calcium in your diet, but it is important to avoid dehydration.
Future ☐ 	I expect the endocrinologists will see you within the next month. At the hospital they will
probably do further tests and may ofer an operation to cure the problem by removing the
gland. Sometimes no treatment is required, particularly if the calcium level stays below 3.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever start to feel thirsty, start passing more urine, have any pains or tummy upset,
please come to see me as these may be symptoms of raised calcium. Tat is a lot of infor-
mation; may I check I have been clear – what symptoms will lead you to contact the GP
straight away? Tank you. See you soon – and please bring any further questions with you.
➠ 344
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 2

-- 359 of 575 --

➠ 345	
Patient’s Story 	Hyperparathyroidism
Doctor’s notes Avani Virdee, 57 years. PMH: none. Medications: none.
Bloods taken for routine health check. Raised calcium and PTH.
Other bloods normal.
How to act 	Keen to know your results and what it means.
PC 	‘I was told to have a second blood test and then I’ve received another letter saying you
wanted to speak to me about my tests… What’s wrong?’
History 	You have been a little tired but are otherwise very well.
You had a suspected kidney stone 4 months ago, but the pain settled spontaneously so you
didn’t go for your USS. You have had no pain since.
Social 	You are married with 2 children.
You are a medical secretary. You are Sikh.
You are a new grandmother so are ofen on the road travelling to see the family.
ICE 	You thought you were tired because you are busy with work and the family.
You haven’t slept well this week with fear over what the doctor may say.
You do not know what to expect.
You have never heard of hyperparathyroidism. You want to know all about it.
Ask the doctor ‘I thought calcium was good for you.’
‘What has caused it?’
‘Should I stop eating yoghurt and milk?’
Examination 	Examination of the neck is normal with no lymphadenopathy.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 2

-- 360 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Hyperparathyroidism
PTH is released in response to low calcium.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Causes include an adenoma on the parathyroid gland or familial endocrine disorders (e.g. multiple endo-
crine neoplasia).
Blood tests show a raised albumin-adjusted calcium + raised PTH + reduced phosphate.
Symptoms1 	Asymptomatic 	(ofen if calcium is below 3).
‘Bones’ 	Fractures from reduced BMD, fatigue and myopathy.
‘Stones’ 	Kidney stones.
‘Groans’ 	Nausea, vomiting, constipation, gastritis and pancreatitis.
‘Moans’ 	Malaise, confusion, depression or reduced GCS.
Dehydration 	Polydipsia, polyuria and dehydration.
Hypercalcaemia
Diferential diagnosis Investigations required/fndings
Myeloma 	Normal PTH 	Anaemia + renal impairment + monoclonal gammopathy
Bone metastases 	Normal PTH 	CT CAP if previous malignancy
Sarcoidosis 	Normal PTH 	CXR
Paget’s 	Normal PTH 	Raised ALP
Addison’s 	Normal PTH 	Low Na + raised K
Vitamin D toxicity 	Normal PTH 	Raised vitamin D
Tyrotoxicosis 	Normal PTH 	Raised T4
Differential diagnosis of raised PTH
Iatrogenic (e.g. lithium) 	Normal calcium
Vitamin D defciency
Secondary ↑PTH 	Low/normal calcium drives the rise in PTH
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism 	Similar picture to primary ↑PTH and occurs in CKD1
Management of primary hyperparathyroidism2
Refer for surgery if symptoms of hypercalcaemia, renal stones, fractures, osteoporosis.
Calcimimetics (cinacalet – check licensing) if surgery unsuccessful or declined or Ca >2.85 mmol/L +
symptoms or >3.0 mmol/L.
Consider bisphosphonates (see NICE guideline).
Annual bloods: albumin-adjusted Ca, eGFR.
Imaging: biannual DEXA. USS renal tract if possible renal stones.
➠ 346
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 2

-- 361 of 575 --

➠ 347
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Jayne Fitzpatrick 	31 years 	F
PMH 	Wrist fracture
Recurrent urinary tract infections – three in the past 6 months.
Tonsillitis
Chlamydia
Termination of pregnancy
Stress at work
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Bloods taken for routine health check
Investigations 	No recent results
Household 	No household members registered

-- 362 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Tired All the Time
Open ☐ 	Tell me more about how you feel. Any other changes? How are you sleeping?
Impact ☐ 	How is feeling so tired afecting you day to day? In any other ways?
Sense ☐ 	You seem puzzled as to what may be causing it.
History ☐ 	What medical problems have you had? How are you now? How is your mood now? Do you
take any medicines from the pharmacy or supplements? Any stress in your life or worries?
Is anyone at home with you? Do you have family? Are you in a relationship? Do you take
any contraception? How did you break your wrist?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think may be causing this? Is there anything you are particularly worried about
or that has crossed your mind? Is there anything you were hoping we would decide today?
Flags ☐ 	Do you know if you snore or have any pauses in your breathing? Would you have a sleep
if you were sitting down quietly in the afernoon, a passenger in a car or in a meeting? Is
there any chance you could be pregnant? When was your last period? Was it a normal
period? Are they regular? Or heavy? I see you had a urine infection in the past; do you
have any symptoms of going more ofen or burning? Any weight loss or drenching night
sweats? Have you felt fushed at times? Any headaches? Have your arms or legs felt diferent
or foppy? Any visual changes? Any recent colds, ear or throat problems? Any problems
with your breathing or in the chest? Stomach pain or change in bowels? Have you noticed
any unusual dizziness or palpitations? Tell me more about the dizziness: room spinning or
feeling lightheaded? What is your eating regime like? Do you avoid any food groups?
Risk ☐ 	Are there any medical problems that run in the family? Have you travelled in the past couple
of years? Or had any recent illnesses or rashes or bites?
Impression ☐ 	I wonder if this may be a problem originating from the over- or under-production of a
hormone, although there are many reasons why one may be tired.
Explanation ☐ Te thyroid function, blood sugar level or red cell blood level can all cause tiredness.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have been feeling exhausted for 4 months. It is unlike you to need time
of work. You have also noticed a few symptoms: passing urine frequently, weight gain,
light-headedness and absent periods. Your skin and hair are diferent. You believe you may
be low and feel your thinking processes are perhaps slower. In the past 6 months you have
broken your wrist and had urine infections.
Empathy ☐ 	It must be a real struggle when you feel so tired.
Examination ☐ I would like to see you at the surgery to measure your height, weight and blood pressure, look
at your skin and hands, listen to your heart and lungs, feel your stomach, your neck and legs,
look in your eyes and check your vision please. Would you be able to bring a urine sample?
Options ☐ 	I would also like to arrange a blood test to check for anaemia, check your liver and kidneys,
your hormones such as thyroid, the hormones that control your periods, and a blood test
which shows the level of your steroid hormone. It would also be helpful if you could collect
your urine for 24 hours, again to check for the amount of steroid in your body. I’ll give you
a container when you come in.
Empower ☐ 	I would avoid alcohol whilst you are feeling like this and try to go for walks even if you are
feeling exhausted.
InCludE ☐ 	You can of course take a multivitamin if you wish but this is unlikely to make a diference,
especially as you are already eating a good diet.
Future ☐ 	Can we talk again on the phone 3 days afer you have handed in your urine and had your
blood tests?
Specifcs ☐ 	Once we have the results, I will have a better idea where the problem may lie. Depending
on what the frst blood test shows, you may need further blood tests or imaging and I may
also ask a hormone specialist doctor to see you at the hospital.
Safety net ☐ 	If you do feel suddenly unwell with new symptoms, for example a headache or vomiting,
please see a doctor straight away.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 3	
➠ 348

-- 363 of 575 --

Patient’s Story 	Tired All the Time
➠ 349
Doctor’s notes Jayne Fitzpatrick, 31 years. PMH: wrist fracture, recurrent UTIs – three in the last 6
months, chlamydia, tonsillitis, termination of pregnancy and stress at work. No current
medications.
How to act 	Pleasant.
PC 	‘I just thought I’d see if there’s a reason why I feel tired all the time.’
History 	For the past 4 months you have felt increasingly tired. You sleep well and do not snore
or have any pauses in your breathing. You have not fallen asleep during the daytime and
even if you do try to rest you would not fall asleep. You already have 8 hours’ sleep each
night. Your periods are usually regular; however, you haven’t had a period for 5 months.
Your periods were not heavy. You did a pregnancy test 2 days ago, which was negative. You
use condoms but you have not wanted to have sex recently. Being a veterinary nurse, you
know about some problems like diabetes and you have noticed a slight thirst and possible
increased frequency. You have no symptoms of an infection. You have put on weight but
don’t know why. You have no night sweats or fevers. You have had no foreign travel other
than Europe. You have had no recent rashes. You have had some spots on your face recently.
Your bowels are normal. You do not have headaches and have no neurological or visual
symptoms but your legs don’t feel as strong, e.g. when walking up the stairs. At work you
have started to take the lif. You have noticed swelling around your ankles. If asked how
this is afecting you – you had to take a day of work last week which you felt guilty about.
You have been discussing with the vet how drained you feel. ‘I’ve not needed a day of work
since I fractured my wrist 6 months ago – even with urine infections I carry on.’
You just tripped on the kerb when you fractured the wrist.
Your boss is worried about you; you are usually quite jovial. You feel your thinking is a
little slower. You would like your hair to feel nice again. You did feel slightly lightheaded
last week. Your ankles swell at the end of the day.
‘Te vet commented that I’ve lost my usual spirit.’ He encouraged you to take another morn-
ing of work to phone the doctor today. If asked about the conversations you have had with
the vet: he suggested you need some blood tests and you are hoping the doctor will suggest
this today. Straight afer the conversation with the vet, you scribbled down a list of what the
vet thought the doctor may do. You have this list for the doctor if he/she seems interested
in your ideas. ‘Anaemia, kidney, thyroid, diabetes, liver, hormones.’ You feel saddened by
what the vet said. You don’t know why you have lost your spirit. Life should be good. You
have not been crying and you don’t think you are depressed but perhaps you are a little low.
Social 	You are a veterinary nurse. You are in a relationship of 2 years and you plan to move in
together soon. Life is not stressful. You drink alcohol occasionally. You do not smoke. You
do not currently exercise.
ICE 	You are just not sure what has caused it. You wondered if you should take a supplement.
Examination 	BMI 27. BP 150/92. Skin – some bruising, acne, abdominal striae.
No palpable thyroid or lymphadenopathy. No hepatosplenomegaly.
HS normal. HR 70 bpm regular. Apyrexial. Hands – no clubbing or nail changes.
Lungs clear. Urine dip negative. Fundi normal.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 3

-- 364 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Tired All the Time
Complete CSA’s motto ‘Common things are common… but what mustn’t
I miss?’
Have a look at the BMJ Easily Missed series and have a think about how each of these conditions may present.
Cushing’s syndrome1
Symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome arise due to excess levels of glucocorticosteroids (e.g. cortisol). ‘Te most
common cause is the use of exogenous glucocorticoids.’1
Tere are two types of endogenous Cushing’s syndrome based on the aetiology:
1. ACTH-dependent, e.g. excessive ACTH production by the pituitary (Cushing’s disease), ectopic ACTH
production, e.g. malignancy – usually small-cell lung cancer.
2. ACTH-independent, e.g. adrenal adenoma or carcinoma, excess glucocorticoid medication.
Symptoms and signs include: weight gain, bufalo hump, truncal obesity, moon facies, proximal muscle
weakness, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, gonadal dysfunction, loss of libido, skin changes (e.g. striae),
hypertension, oedema, headaches and visual disturbance if due to a pituitary adenoma.
Investigations:
• 	24-hour urinary free cortisol.
• 	Dexamethasone suppression test. 1 mg oral dexamethasone at 11 p.m. and measure 9 a.m. cortisol.
• 	Late-night salivary cortisol.
‘Tired All the Time’
Tis is a common presentation in general practice. In the majority of cases no medical cause can be found.
Screen for obstructive sleep apnoea, mental health problems, perform a full systemic enquiry and take a
detailed social history. If no cause is found, request routine blood tests and advise simple measures such
as healthy eating, keeping hydrated, good sleep hygiene, avoiding cafeine and graded exercise can help.
➠ 350
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 3

-- 365 of 575 --

➠ 351
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Fatima Sayed 	47 years 	F
PMH 	Graves’ disease – 1 year ago
Medications 	Carbimazole 20 mg
Propranolol 40 mg TDS PRN (not issued for 6 months).
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	12 months ago – goitre palpable, confrmed on USS, no thyroid
nodules. Diagnosis Graves’ disease. Start carbimazole 30 mg.
10 months ago – T4 in the normal range. TSH remains low
(expected). Decrease carbimazole to 20 mg. Repeat TSH/T4/T3
in 6 weeks. If TSH remains low or T4 increased again increase
carbimazole.
8 months ago – TSH in the normal range. Asymptomatic.
Decrease carbimazole to 10 mg.
Investigations 	1 month ago 	1 year ago
TSH 	2.2 mIU/L 	<0.1 mIU/L 	(0.2–4.0 mIU/L)
T4 	8.0 pmol/L 	32 pmol/L 	(10–20 pmol/L)
T3 	2.0 nmol/L 	3.4 nmol/L 	(0.9–2.5 nmol/L)
TSH receptor antibodies positive
Household 	Aaqil Sayed 	49 years 	M

-- 366 of 575 --

➠ 352
Example Consultation 	Hyperthyroidism
Open ☐ 	Tank you for phoning. How are you? How are you getting on with the treatment?
Experience ☐ 	Would you mind taking me back to the start? I’m interested to know what it was like for you
before you commenced treatment. What is your understanding of your condition? What is
your understanding of the blood results?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had previous conversations with a GP about when to stop treatment? Have you
had anything on your mind that has been worrying you? You mentioned you would like to
stop the treatment; is there anything else you were hoping for today?
History ☐ 	Tell me more about yourself. Have you noticed any new or troublesome symptoms? What
dose are you taking of the carbimazole? How ofen are you taking the tablet? Have you any
other medical history? Any medical problems that are in the family? Do you take other
medicines or supplements? Any stressors at work or home? Do you drink? Or smoke?
Flags ☐ 	Is your weight stable? Did you ever have any problem with your eyes or vision?
Impact ☐ 	And what impact has the Graves’ disease had on your life?
Sense ☐ 	I see you have not seen the GP for 8 months and I’m sensing there may be a reason why
you have come to talk to me about the treatment at this time.
Curious ☐ 	Tell me more about your thoughts about the treatment. I’m wondering why at this stage
you feel it would be benefcial to see a specialist.
Examination ☐ Are you able to tell me your pulse and BP? And could you send me a photograph of your face
and neck so that I can see your eyes and any swellings in your neck? Tank you.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you feel well, all your symptoms of Graves’ disease have gone. You started
reading about when to discontinue the carbimazole and this led you to forums which dis-
cussed the risk of the drug, which has alarmed you and led you to reassess the situation.
You are wondering if the beneft of carbimazole no longer outweighs the risk and you would
like to discuss stopping treatment with a specialist. Is that correct?
Impression ☐ 	It does sound like you have had simple Graves’ disease, meaning high thyroid levels without
signs of eye disease.
Explanation ☐ You are correct; there is a risk of agranulocytosis, 1 in 1000. With any treatment we need
to weigh up the beneft of the treatment versus the risk.
Empathy ☐ 	I can appreciate that when you hear about the frightening risks associated with a tablet and,
particularly now that you are well again, it is natural to revisit the decision as to whether
the benefts of the tablet continue to outweigh the risks.
InCludE ☐ 	Looking at your blood tests and feeling your thyroid, a scan would not be helpful now. It
was important at the beginning, in order to help make the diagnosis.
Options ☐ 	We usually treat Graves’ disease for about 18 months. I see your recent thyroid levels were
in the normal range, and therefore I would usually suggest 5 mg carbimazole for the next 6
months and then, if the blood tests remain normal, aim to stop it when you have completed
18 months of treatment.
Recommend ☐ If you would like to stop it early that is your decision, but there is a risk of your symptoms
returning and the disease not being completely treated. I suggest decreasing the carbimazole
to 5 mg for 6 weeks, then we can reassess in 6 weeks with a blood test afer you have had a
chance to think about it. Shall we do that?
Future ☐ 	If at any stage the TSH drops below the normal range, we need to increase the carbimazole.
Once we have stopped the carbimazole I would like to continue to check your TSH level
initially afer 6 weeks then every 3 months for a year.
Empower ☐ 	If there were 100 people like you, at the end of the 18 months, 50 of them might need to
continue carbimazole.1 Smoking is a risk factor for this and if you are interested in stopping
smoking I would like to help you.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever notice a sore throat, rash or infection then arrange a blood test straight away
and withhold the medication until you know the blood test is normal.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 4

-- 367 of 575 --

➠ 353	
Patient’s Story 	Hyperthyroidism
Doctor’s notes Fatima Sayed, 47 years. PMH: hyperthyroidism – 1 year ago.
Medication: carbimazole 20 mg. Consultations: 1 year ago – goitre palpable, confrmed on
USS, no thyroid nodules. Start carbimazole 30 mg.
1 month ago 	1 year ago
TSH 	2.2 mIU/L 	<0.1 mIU/L 	(0.2–4.0 mIU/L)
T4 	8.0 pmol/L 	32 pmol/L 	(10–20 pmol/L)
T3 	2.0 nmol/L 	3.4 nmol/L 	(0.9–2.5 nmol/L)
TSH receptor antibodies positive.
How to act 	Pleasant.
PC 	‘Good morning Doctor. I was hoping to discuss when I could stop my carbimazole please?’
History 	Over a year ago you began to lose weight and feel just not yourself. You remember your
bowels were loose and you felt quite jittery. Your doctor started carbimazole for high thyroid
levels.
Since the treatment you have felt much better. You have always been healthy, take no other
medicines and have no FH.
You have read about Graves’ disease and have a good understanding of the terms TSH, T3
and T4. You called a month ago and the receptionist said the blood tests were normal.
Social 	Barrister, married with three children who have now all lef home.
You drink no alcohol but smoke fve cigarettes a day.
You are active and attend art classes.
ICE 	‘I should come of it as soon as I can.’ A pragmatic suggestion you believe; however, if the
doctor explores your thoughts behind this… You were reading about when to stop car-
bimazole and came across website forums which reminded you of the risk of the tablet.
Tis led you down the path of reading frightening stories about agranulocytosis and you
realised that now you feel well you should stop this tablet. You do not want this problem
to happen to you. You wondered whether you should see the specialist again before you
fnished treatment so she could do a scan again to see if the treatment has to continue. You
presume she would rescan and you would like this. You follow the doctor’s advice if he or
she seems to know what they are doing. Otherwise, you push to see a specialist.
Examination 	HR 70 bpm regular. BP 120/70. No palpable thyroid.
No sign of eye disease.
Photograph, if sent, shows no enlarged thyroid and no signs of eye disease.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 4

-- 368 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Hyperthyroidism
History: Rapid onset malaise, fever and pain in thyroid (suspect acute thyroiditis)
SOB, hoarseness, dysphagia, neck pressure
Exercise intolerance, fatigue, muscle weakness
˜sweating, heat intolerance. ˜appetite °weight
Women: subfertility, oligo-/amenorhoea. Men: reduced libido, gynaecomastia
See NICE guidelines for full list
Examination: 	General: agitation, weight loss
Cardiovascular: sinus tachycardia, AF, heart failure, peripheral oedema
˜yroid: enlargement
Hands: ÿne tremor, palmar erythema
Skin: warm and moist, pruritus, urticaria, vitiligo, di˛use alopecia
MSK: muscle wasting, brisk re˝exes
Eyes: exophthalmos, lid retraction, lid lag, chemosis, conjunctivitis, corneal ulceration, strabismus
See NICE guidelines for full list
Next tests: Repeat TSH, T4, T3. FBC (anaemia)
Calcium and LFTs may be raised
˜yroid receptor antibodies (85% positive in Graves’)
If positive no need to do a thyroid scintigraphy scan
ESR (raised in Graves’ or thyroiditis)
˜yroid scintigraphy scan if unsure on palpation of the thyroid
(GPs may be able to request if antibody negative)
Examine the thyroid
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 4
Beta-blockers and
NSAIDs
Monitor TFTs
Radioactive iodine or surgery. Consider
a 2WW referral for an unexplained
thyroid lump
Symmetrical goitre 	Multinodular 	Tender bilateral
enlarged thyroid
Single nodule
Graves’ disease 	Toxic
multinodular
Single toxic
nodule (adenoma)
De Quervain’s
thyroiditis
Emergency admission if thyrotoxic crisis
Refer urgently to endocrinology if pituitary or hypothalamic disorder suspected
For all others with new onset hyperthyroidism: refer to, or discuss with, endocrinology for specialist Ix and
management (urgency depends on clinical judgement). Whilst waiting:
• Consider prescribing beta-blocker (titrate dose to clinical response –
palpitations/tremor/anxiety/tachycardia). Taper and stop once euthyroid
• If uncertainty about prescribing beta-blocker – seek specialist advice
• Seek specialist advice about starting carbimazole in primary care:
• If symptoms troublesome despite beta-blocker
• At risk of complication of hyperthyroidism
• Taking amiodarone or lithium (liaison with specialist prescribing this drug may be needed)
• Give information lea˝et2
➠ 354

-- 369 of 575 --

➠ 355
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Jayne Smith 	37 years 	F
PMH 	Type 2 diabetes
Obesity – last BMI 35
Medications 	Metformin 1 g BD
Gliclazide 40 mg daily
Rigevidon
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	2 months ago HbA1c 51 mmol/mol
Household 	No household members registered

-- 370 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Diabetes in Pregnancy
Open ☐ 	It’s great that you are considering this in advance.
Experience ☐ 	Are you aware of any risks of diabetes in pregnancy?
Sense ☐ 	I can hear you are keen to control your diabetes. We will look at your diabetes very carefully.
ICE ☐ 	Is there anything that particularly worries you? What have you been advised so far? Is there
anything else you were wondering?
Curious ☐ 	You seem to have a good understanding. Where has this information come from?
Explanation ☐ Babies can be larger and therefore it’s important to control your blood sugar as much as
possible. Ofen babies need delivering a few weeks earlier. Tey do sometimes initially
need help with their blood sugar afer birth and some babies need help in the baby unit for
a while. In later life, the children can have a higher risk of obesity or developing diabetes
themselves. Being overweight can also put you at risk of pregnancy complications so you
may need to take other medications such as aspirin when you do become pregnant.
Risk ☐ 	Do you know what your last HbA1c was?
History ☐ 	Are you otherwise well? When do you take your medicines? I’m interested to know more
about you and your routine.
Impact ☐ 	How does your diabetes impact on your life? Is there any time you struggle with your
diabetes?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have had good control of your diabetes since diagnosis but your HbA1c
has crept up and you are hoping for better control as you are planning a pregnancy. You are
worried about risks to the baby and are frightened about labour.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate the risks can potentially be scary.
Impression ☐ 	Being diligent about your health is likely to give a much better outcome for you and the
baby. You should be aiming for an HbA1c of <48 mmol/mol. Tis can be a challenge and
we need to avoid hypos – a nickname for hypoglycaemic episodes – which means the blood
sugar is too low, putting you at risk.
Explanation ☐ When you do fall pregnant, blood sugars can be more erratic, especially if vomiting.
Experience ☐ 	Are you aware of the symptoms of a hypo?
Options ☐ 	Do you have a blood glucose and ketone testing kit? You should start taking 5 mg folic acid,
a higher dose than for non-diabetic women, and I will prescribe it for you. You also need
extra vitamin D. Let’s also arrange your diabetic eye check now. I will ask the secretary to
arrange this. You will need more frequent eye checks in pregnancy. We should change your
gliclazide to insulin. How do you feel about this? We then need to discuss the benefts of
metformin. Tere is a special clinic which manages women with diabetes in pregnancy and
I will refer you to this.
Empower ☐ 	Continuing exercise will help control your blood sugar. You could see the dietician in case
there are any other dietary changes you could make. Any extra weight loss you can achieve
will both help you conceive and reduce risk in pregnancy.
InCludE ☐ 	It is normal to feel anxious and concerned about labour. Is there anything specifc that has
been going through your mind? Te team will be monitoring you and the baby closely
and discuss with you when they believe is the safest time to deliver the baby. If you do feel
that the worry and anxiety about labour is afecting you, come and see me and we can talk
through your options. What are your thoughts?
Future ☐ 	Shall we look at your blood readings again in a month, then consider insulin together?
We should monitor your kidney function and check your chickenpox and rubella status
when we take your bloods. Let’s do this a couple of days before we meet next time so we
can discuss your latest HbA1c then. Please bring a urine sample at the same time to check
for protein.
Safety net ☐ 	Until the HbA1c comes down, are you happy to continue contraception? Tat is a lot of
information, do you have any questions?
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 5	
➠ 356

-- 371 of 575 --

➠ 357	
Patient’s Story 	Diabetes in Pregnancy
Doctor’s notes Jayne Smith, 37 years. PMH: type 2 diabetes, obesity. Last HbA1c – 51 mmol/mol.
Medications: metformin 1 g BD, gliclazide 40 mg daily, Rigevidon.
How to act 	Very interested in your health.
PC 	‘My husband and I would like to start a family. I just wanted some advice regarding my
diabetes.’
History 	You have had diabetes for 2 years.
Tere is a strong history of type 2 diabetes in your family, but you are aware your weight
contributed to developing diabetes. Te diagnosis provided motivation to make lifestyle
changes needed to lose weight and get healthier. You are aware there is some way to go but
are proud you have managed to get your BMI down from 46 to 35. You have changed your
diet and taken up distance running.
You take great care but have recently been on holiday.
You expect your blood sugar may be worse than usual.
You eat well but ofen struggle to fnd time to exercise.
You have been reading a lot about diabetes and pregnancy.
You have a BM testing kit which you bought. You know the symptoms of a ‘hypo’.
Social 	Dental nurse. Married 2 years ago. No alcohol and never smoked.
ICE 	You are unsure whether you should stay on your metformin.
You expect the GP will say start insulin and you are happy with this.
You are mostly worried about the risks to the baby afer birth and in the future.
You are scared about the labour as you know babies with diabetic mums tend to be big.
You would like advice about preparing for pregnancy with DM.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 5

-- 372 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Diabetes in Pregnancy
‘Diagnose gestational diabetes if the woman has either: a fasting plasma glucose level of 5.6 mmol/L or above
or a 2-hour plasma glucose level of 7.8 mmol/L or above.’1
Counselling pre-conception1
Book an eye check (unless had one in the last 6 months) and urine ACR.1
Folic acid 5 mg/day until 12 weeks.
Ofer (up to) monthly HbA1c measurements pre-pregnancy and a BM and ketone kit to all women with
type 1 diabetes who are planning a pregnancy.
Advise women with diabetes who are planning to become pregnant to aim for the same capillary plasma
glucose target ranges as recommended for all people with type 1 diabetes:
• 	a fasting plasma glucose level of 5–7 mmol/L on waking and
• 	a plasma glucose level of 4–7 mmol/L before meals at other times of the day.
‘Advise women with diabetes who are planning to become pregnant to aim to keep their HbA1c level below
48 mmol/mol (6.5%), if this is achievable without causing problematic hypoglycaemia’ ‘Reassure women
that any reduction in HbA1c level towards the target of 48 mmol/mol (6.5%) is likely to reduce the risk of
congenital malformations in the baby.’1
Ofer a structured education programme as soon as possible if not already attended one.
‘Women with diabetes may be advised to use metformin as an adjunct or alternative to insulin in the pre-
conception period and during pregnancy, when the likely benefts from improved blood glucose control
outweigh the potential for harm. Stop all other oral blood glucose-lowering agents before pregnancy, and
use insulin instead.’1
Risks1
Increased risk of macrosomia and therefore birth complications.
Te possibility of temporary health problems in the newborn and possible admission to the neonatal unit.
Te risk of obesity and diabetes in the child in later life.
Nausea and vomiting during pregnancy may afect blood sugar control.
Hypoglycaemia unawareness during pregnancy.
Metformin
Discuss the benefits of glycaemic control vs the potential for harm. Refer to http://www.uktis.org/
(UK teratology information service).
Diagnosed gestational diabetes
Refer to:
• 	‘joint diabetes and antenatal clinic within 1 week’1
• 	a dietitian.
Ofer immediate treatment with insulin, with or without metformin, as well as changes in diet and exer-
cise, to women with gestational diabetes who have a fasting plasma glucose level of 7.0 mmol/L or above
at diagnosis.1
Encourage foods with a low glycaemic index and regular daily exercise.
Targets 	Do not use HbA1c routinely in the 2nd/3rd trimester.1
Without risking hypoglycaemia, if possible, aim for ‘fasting: 5.3 mmol/L and 1 hour afer
meals: 7.8 mmol/L or 2 hours afer meals: 6.4 mmol/L (new 2015).’ 1
➠ 358
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology – 5

-- 373 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Antihyperglycaemics
➠ 359
Medication 	Metformin 	Sulfonylurea 	DPP-4 inhibitors
E.g. 	Metformin 	Glibenclamide, gliclazide,
glipizide, glimepiride,
tolbutamide
Alogliptin, Linagliptin,
Saxagliptin, Sitagliptin,
Vildagliptin
Advice – see BNF for 	Lactic acidosis risk 	Review at 2 weeks 	Stop if HbA1c not
full list 	Warn the patient if D&V 	Titrate dose on pre- 	decreasing, e.g. by >0.5%
to stop metformin, ACEI, 	breakfast BMs 	or 5–6 mmol/mol at 6
diuretics and inform the 	months 1
GP
Monitor B12
How given 	Oral 	Oral 	Oral
How it works 	↓ glycogenesis
↓ intestinal absorption
↑ insulin sensitivity
↑ insulin secretion 	DPP-4 blocks incretin
production
Incretin ↑insulin
Cautions and 	Lactic acidosis risk 	Hypoglycaemic risk 	Ketoacidosis
contraindications – see 	Recent cardiac, 	Severe liver disease 	Hepatic or renal
BNF for full list 	respiratory, liver, renal
disease
Avoid if eGFR <30
(standard release) or <45
(modifed release) 2
Stop if creatinine >150 or
eGFR <301
Severe renal impairment
Ketoacidosis
Acute porphyria
Caution in elderly, obese,
mild–moderate renal/
hepatic impairment2
impairment
Heart failure
Elderly
Pancreatic cancer
PMH pancreatitis
Hypoglycaemia risk 	Low 	Yes 	Low unless combined
with another Rx with
hypo risk 1
Risks and adverse 	<1/10,000 – lactic acidosis 	Hypoglycaemia 	1–10/1000 – pancreatitis 1
events – see BNF for full 	D&V, ↓ appetite and 	GI disturbance,2 	Headache, oedema,
list 	abdominal pain1
Metallic/altered taste1
B12 defciency
Skin reactions (erythema,
urticaria, pruritus)2
photosensitivity, liver
function changes and
rarely haematological
disorders
infections, GI
disturbance1
Hypersensitivity
reactions and rashes2
Always use the most up-to-date version of the BNF yourself before prescribing. Ensure you have checked all
the cautions, contraindications, interactions and dose regimes.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology

-- 374 of 575 --

Medication 	SGLT-2 inhibitors 	Insulin 	GLP-1 agonist 	Glitazones
Example options 	Dapaglifozin
Canaglifozin
Empaglifozin
Dulaglutide
Exenatide
Liraglutide
Lixisenatide
Semaglutide
Pioglitazone
Advice – see BNF 	Seek specialist
advice
Monitor renal
function1
Useful if BMI >35
Check U&E and
eGFR before and 2
weeks later
Seek specialist advice
May improve lipid profle
Monitor LFT1
Stop if HbA1c not decreasing,
e.g. by >0.5% or 5–6 mmol/mol
at 6 months3
How given 	Oral 	s/c 	s/c 	Oral
How it works 	‘Pee out (urinate)
sugar’
Replaces
insulin
↑ insulin secretion 	↑ insulin sensitivity
Cautions and 	DKA – stop Rx 	Elderly 	Risk of bladder cancer so
contraindications 	immediately 	AKI 	avoid in smokers and those
– see BNF for full
list
Avoid if eGFR <60
and stop if eGFR <45
Severe hepatic
disturbance
Hypotension
Elderly >85
Active foot disease
Caution if eGFR
30–50 and stop if
eGFR <30
Caution with DPP4
Pancreatic cancer
Gastroparesis
Thyroid cancer
MEN type 2
Consider stopping
after 6/12 if HbA1c
hasn’t dropped >1%
or 10–11 mmol/mol
or weight dropped
by >3% 3
on chemotherapy or exposed
to occupational drugs, or
radiotherapy to pelvis2 (see
MHRA alert) 4
Avoid if:
Heart failure
Liver impairment
Bladder cancer
Uninvestigated haematuria1
Caution in:
Elderly, insulin users risk
factors for bladder cancer,
heart failure, bone fracture2
Hypoglycaemia
risk
Low 	High 	Low/medium 	Low
Weight 	Loss 	Gain 	Loss 	Gain
Risks and adverse 	UTIs 	Hypo 	Pancreatitis 	Numbness, visual impairment,
events – see BNF 	Fournier’s gangrene 	Nausea and 	weight increase, insomnia2
for full list 	(necrotising fasciitis 	vomiting 	Exacerbation of heart failure
of genitalia – mainly 	Headache, dizziness 	Bone #s
men) 	Renal impairment 	Liver impairment
Renal impairment 	AV block/sinus 	Increased risk of infections
Lower limb
amputation (see
MHRA alert)5
tachycardia
Skin
reactions – rash,
Increase in relative risk of
bladder cancer (range 1.12–
1.33). Increase in absolute
Risk of DKA (see 	angioedema, 	risk likely to be small 4
MHRA alert)6
urticaria, pruritus
Thirst
Constipation
Dyslipidaemia 2
➠ 360
 	Always use the most up-to-date version of the BNF yourself before prescribing. Ensure you have checked all
the cautions, contraindications, interactions and dose regimes.
Metabolic Problems and Endocrinology

-- 375 of 575 --

CHAPTER 15 OVERVIEW
Musculoskeletal Health
➠ 361
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Musculoskeletal Health
Learning points in this chapter include:
1 	Low Back Pain 	‘Spinal disorders including mechanical
back pain’
‘Examination of back and spine’
‘Communicate effectively taking in
to account the psychosocial impact
of MSK problems on the patient,
their family, friends, dependents and
employers’
Causes
Flags
Guidelines
Imaging – MRI
2 	Knee Pain 	‘Intervene urgently when patients
present with emergencies or red fag
symptoms...’
‘Sprains, strains and other signifcant
soft-tissue trauma’
‘Coordinate care with other health
professionals leading to effective
and appropriate acute and chronic
management’
Osteoarthritis
ACL injuries
Investigating knee pain
NICE CKS on assessing and managing
knee pain
3 	Osteoporosis 	‘Osteoporosis – primary and
secondary’
‘Screening tools and prevention
programmes for conditions such as …
osteoporosis’
‘Health issues associated with the
menopause…. osteoporosis’
‘Risk factors for osteoporosis’
NICE Guideline CG146. Osteoporosis:
assessing the risk of fragility fracture.
February 2017
4 	Plantar
Fasciitis
‘Foot disorders such as plantar
fasciitis’
Gout
Differential diagnosis of foot pain
5 	Shoulder Pain 	‘Joint pain, stiffness...including
individual joints…shoulder’
‘Advise appropriately to support the
self-care and prevention of problem’
Anatomy
Rotator cuff tendonitis
Adhesive capsulitis
Osteoarthritis
Referred pain to the shoulder

-- 376 of 575 --

CHAPTER 15 REFERENCES
Low Back Pain
1. 	Samanta J., Kendall J., Samanta A. Chronic low back pain. BMJ 2003; 326: 525. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.326.7388.535. Mar 2003.
2. 	http://patient.info/doctor/low-back-pain-and-sciatica. Oct 2020.
3. 	https://startback.hfac.keele.ac.uk/. July 2021.
4. 	https://www.oxfordshireccg.nhs.uk/professional-resources/documents/clinical-guidelines/MSK-and-physio/
cervical/MRI-referral-guidelines-for-cervical-thoracic-and-lumbar-spine-for-adults.pdf. Collison K., Russ R.
Oxfordshire CCG. Jun 2014.
Useful Resource
https://patient.info/news-and-features/the-best-exercises-for-back-pain
Knee Pain
1. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/osteoarthritis/management/management/. Jun 2018.
2. 	Kobayashi H., Kanamura T., Koshida S. et al. Mechanisms of the anterior cruciate ligament injury in sports activities:
a twenty-year clinical research of 1,700 athletes. J Sports Sci Med 2010; 9: 669–75.
Osteoporosis
1. 	NICE Guideline CG146. Osteoporosis: assessing the risk of fragility fracture. Feb 2017.
2. 	http://www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.aspx?country=1
3. 	http://www.qfracture.org/
4. 	http://www.shef.ac.uk/NOGG/
5. 	Michaëlsson K., Melhus H., Warensjö Lemming E. et al. Long term calcium intake and rates of all cause and cardi-
ovascular mortality: community based prospective longitudinal cohort study. BMJ 2013; 346: f228.
6. 	NICE CKS. http://cks.nice.org.uk/osteoporosis-prevention-of-fragility-fractures#!scenario:1. May 2020.
7. 	http://www.cgem.ed.ac.uk/research/rheumatological/calcium-calculator
8. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/osteoporosis-prevention-of-fragility-fractures/prescribing-information/
bisphosphonates/. May 2020.
9. 	NICE Technology appraisal guidance TA464. Bisphosphonates for treating osteoporosis. Jul 2019.
10. http://patient.info/medicine/alendronic-acid-for-osteoporosis-fosamax. Jul 2020.
Plantar Fasciitis/Differential Diagnosis – Foot Pain
1. 	Cooper A., Blythe J., Wise E. BMJ Masterclass for GPs. Musculoskeletal Medicine. Course Materials. Apr 2013.
2. 	http://www.mdcalc.com/ottawa-ankle-rule/
3. 	NICE CKS. http://cks.nice.org.uk/gout#!scenario. Feb 2018.
Useful Resource
https://patient.info/foot-care/heel-and-foot-pain-plantar-fasciitis
Shoulder Pain
1. 	http://www.physio-pedia.com/Supraspinatus_tendonitis
2. 	https://patient.info/doctor/shoulder-pain-pro. Jun 2015.
3. 	https://patient.info/bones-joints-muscles/frozen-shoulder-leafet. Dec 2018.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 362
Musculoskeletal Health

-- 377 of 575 --

➠ 363
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Rachel West 	43 years 	F
PMH 	Irritable bowel syndrome
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Arthur West 	45 years 	M
Jennifer West 	6 years 	F
Timothy West 	4 years 	M

-- 378 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Low Back Pain
Open ☐ 	Rachel, it is a pleasure to meet you and I’m sorry you are in this much pain. What has
happened? Tell me more about the pain. Are you having any other symptoms?
Impact ☐ 	Tell me which important areas of your life are afected by the back pain.
ICE ☐ 	What do you think has caused this? What did you feel we should do today? Is there anything
that you are especially worried about? What pain relief have you tried?
History ☐ 	Back pain can sometimes be due to kidney problems: any problems passing urine? Is your
tummy okay? When was your last period? Tell me more about you. Do you have family?
Are you otherwise well? Is everything okay at home?
Flags ☐ 	I just need to ask a few questions to check that both the spine and you are healthy. Any
weight loss? Any fever? Does the pain wake you at night? Have you ever injured your back?
Any weakness or numbness in your legs? Any problems controlling your bladder or bowels?
Any numbness around your bottom?
Curious ☐ 	What do you think is keeping you awake all night – the pain or something else?
Sense ☐ 	I see how much pain you are in. You said this is the ‘last straw’. What do you mean?
Risk ☐ 	Work sounds tough. Have you been feeling low even before this happened?
Empathy ☐ 	It must be hard with back pain working and looking afer children. We can do a work note
but your back needs to keep moving or you will stifen up.
O/E ☐ 	May I examine your back with you standing and then check your legs on the couch?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, you developed severe back pain yesterday afer bending forward. You have been fnding
work life difcult, and feel this is the last straw; you need time away from work. You fear the
pain will impact caring for your children. You believe this is a slipped disc and you need a
scan. Have I understood you correctly?
Impression ☐ 	It sounds like you have sciatica.
Experience ☐ 	Have you known anyone with this problem? What do you know about it?
Explanation ☐ In sciatica, the sciatic nerve becomes irritated or squashed which causes pain all the way
down your leg. Tis is probably due to a ‘prolapsed disc’. In this situation, the whole disc
doesn’t usually move, it’s just the sof jelly centre.
InCludE ☐ 	As there are no worrying features – you have not lost weight or had an injury – I do not
believe there is anything nasty happening in your spine so I don’t think a scan would help.
Future ☐ 	Back exercises can really help and are important but improvement can take weeks. Do you
think you can manage exercises at home or would you like a referral to a physio?
Options ☐ 	Pain relief options are naproxen, which is an anti-infammatory or codeine which is a weak
form of morphine. Naproxen can cause tummy irritation, whereas codeine can cause nau-
sea, constipation or drowsiness. Which would be better for you? Okay, naproxen is taken
500 mg twice a day. If this isn’t helping and your back continues to feel in spasm, there is
a tablet called diazepam. I could give you a 3-day supply of this which you can take up to
three times a day? Tis could also make you feel drowsy though and you should not drive.
It is not a drug we can continue to use due to its risks. I would expect that over the next few
days the intensity of the pain should decrease. If you are not getting back to normal afer
4–6 weeks of exercises, please see a doctor, or sooner if you have worsening symptoms.
Empower ☐ 	Tis PIL has some exercises, e.g. lying on the foor, knees up and swing them side to side.
Avoid lifing the children in the meantime.
Specifcs ☐ 	You can self-certify for a week whilst the pain is severe but let’s speak in a week to see how
you are. Please book an appointment. If the pain is not coming under control afer 3 days
of exercises and painkillers, please ask for a telephone consultation with me.
Safety net ☐ 	If your legs feel diferent, you need to inform the doctor. Also – I don’t expect this to hap-
pen – but I tell everyone that, if you lose control of going to the toilet or develop weakness
in your legs, you must let a doctor know immediately.
➠ 364
Musculoskeletal Health – 1

-- 379 of 575 --

➠ 365	
Patient’s Story 	Low Back Pain
Doctor’s notes Rachel West, 43 years. PMH: IBS. Medications: none.
How to act 	You are in a lot of pain.
PC 	‘It’s my back. I’m in agony.’
History 	You have ofen had lower back pain in your life.
It has increased over the past few months.
Ten last night ‘I was picking up toys and I felt my back go.’
‘Tis is the last straw!’ If asked, you mean regarding your work – you need time of.
Te pain goes down your lef leg. It doesn’t wake you but ‘I am awake all night’.
You have not had any numbness or weakness. Full control of bladder and bowels.
Tere are no abdominal, urinary or gynaecological symptoms. LMP 1 week ago.
You have IBS but are otherwise well. No weight loss or fever. No injury.
You have no other symptoms systemically. Paracetamol hasn’t helped the pain.
You have been feeling low but no features of depression.
You haven’t known anyone with this back pain. You don’t know what sciatica means.
Social 	You work in IT. Your work has been very difcult. Your marriage is good.
You have two children. Your husband is a director of a building supplies company and busy.
Tere are problems with your manager and you do not get on.
You hope you can fnd alternative work.
Work has been very stressful. You think about it through the night.
ICE 	You feel you need a scan. You think you have ‘slipped a disc’.
You expect the doctor will tell you to rest and take time of work.
You fear it may take months to heal. You would like some strong pain relief. Accept
naproxen as you think codeine may make your IBS worse.
You worry about playing with the children with this pain.
Your mother is coming to help.
Examination 	No spinal tenderness, tender L paraspinal muscles. Slightly reduced ROM.
Reduced straight leg raise lef leg – 50 degrees.
Normal neurological examination.
Musculoskeletal Health – 1

-- 380 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Low Back Pain
Causes 	Mechanical low back pain, malignancy – primary or secondary, infection (e.g. spinal TB),
ankylosing spondylitis, pyelonephritis or kidney stone, or referred pain, e.g. AAA.
Flags1,2 see also Keele STarT Back stratifying tool3
Red fags (*refers to criteria within Oxford guidance – see below)
O Unexplained weight loss*
O Previous or suspected malignancy*
O Drug abuse, HIV, immunosuppression or corticosteroid use
O Abnormal bloods (ESR >504)* or fever
O Thoracic or night pain
O Trauma*
O <20 or >55 years (worsening/new onset)
O Disturbed gait or progressive neurological deficit
O Comorbidity or unwell patient
O Abnormal function/control of bladder or bowel or saddle anaesthesia
O Known osteoporosis and suspected crush fracture3*
O Severe morning stiffness
O Consider cauda equina syndrome if on examination there is gait disturbance, urinary retention,
abnormal perianal sensation or anal tone with lower limb weakness
Yellow fags (psychosocial factors)
O ‘A negative attitude that back pain is harmful or potentially severely disabling’1
O ‘Fear, avoidance behaviour and reduced activity levels’1
O ‘An expectation that passive, rather than active, treatment will be beneficial’1
O History of depression, low mood and social withdrawal1
O ‘Social or financial problems’1
<20 years 	consider HLAB27 testing for AS if morning stifness and pain awakens the patient.
>55 years 	Consider an ESR, electrophoresis (myeloma screen), urine dipstick, palpating for AAA, PSA
in men and CA125 in women.
So should all >55 years with new onset back pain have an urgent MRI if they have no other red fags and
bloods are normal? Tis is where ‘clinical judgement’ comes in and follow your local guidance.
Oxford CCG guidance4
O Cauda equina
} 	Refer as an emergency to the spinal team.
O Widespread neurological deficit or infection
Red fag symptoms* (no mention of age) 	Direct referral for urgent limited MRI.
Suspected osteoporotic crush fracture only 	Lateral X-ray then routine MRI.
Review diagnosis, conservative Rx and refer to
No red fags and persistent pain >6 weeks the MSK assessment team.
Progressive deformity (kyphosis) 	Review diagnosis and refer to spinal team if
Intractable pain 	} 	patient will consider surgery and is a surgical
candidate	Deteriorating neurology
Occasionally an MRI will report that it cannot exclude malignancy in which case consider a bone scan.
For simple back pain ofer analgesia and exercises. Give a realistic prognosis.
Musculoskeletal Health – 1	
➠ 366

-- 381 of 575 --

➠ 367
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Robert Hayes 	27 years 	M
PMH 	No known medical history
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 382 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Knee Pain
Open ☐ 	What happened? Talk me through the injury in slow motion if you can please. Ten what
did you notice?
Flags ☐ 	Did the knee swell straight away? Could you walk on it? Does the knee lock into a certain
position stopping you from straightening or bending it? Has it given way?
Risk ☐ 	Have you injured your knee before? Any other injury?
Impact ☐ 	And the past couple of days, has it stopped you from doing anything? Do you work? How
would a knee injury impact on your work, hobbies or home life?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think may have happened inside the knee? Has anything else gone through
your mind? Anything else you fear about this injury? Is there anything you thought I might
say we should arrange? Is there anything else you were hoping we could do? Are there any
other thoughts you had about what may be helpful?
Curious ☐ 	Is there a reason why you would prefer to avoid the orthopaedic doctors?
O/E ☐ 	I would like to see you at the surgery to examine your knee. Tat would involve taking of
your trousers, having a look at the knee, then doing some movements to work out what may
have caused the swelling. If you feel any pain during the examination, I would ask you to
tell me where exactly. Is that okay? I have an appointment at 2 p.m. this afernoon. Would
that be convenient?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you believe you may have torn a ligament and fear needing an operation
afer your experience with your right ankle. You are hoping that I will organise an MRI
scan to guide physiotherapy but would like to get better quickly because you don’t want to
be sat out for the rest of the season. Is that correct?
Impression ☐ 	I can’t be sure until I examine you but I think you may be right. It sounds as if it could be
a torn ligament, and I’m wondering specifcally if it is the anterior cruciate ligament. Tis
can be very painful, as you have described.
Sense ☐ 	You sound disappointed and upset.
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of this injury?
Explanation ☐ Tis ligament in the knee prevents your knee from overstretching, but unfortunately if you
have had an injury which causes the leg to overstretch, it can tear.
Empathy ☐ 	It sounds as if you have been lonely since the end of your relationship so I appreciate that
not being able to play football with friends is a huge disappointment.
Options ☐ 	To get an answer and to get you on the mend as soon as possible, afer I have seen you, we
should consider referring you to the trauma clinic today.
InCludE ☐ 	You mentioned you were keen for physio; I think that sounds a good idea but wonder if we
should get the orthopaedic opinion frst.
Recommend ☐ I suggest that I see you frst and then potentially give the trauma registrar a call, if that’s
okay with you.
Future ☐ 	If surgery is needed, keyhole surgery may be an option. I can also prescribe some codeine
for you for additional pain relief if you need it. Does this sound okay? Perhaps once the
injury has settled a little you could still go to matches to support your team and see your
friends?
Empower ☐ 	In the meantime, please keep it elevated with some ice on it to reduce the swelling. Whilst
waiting to see the trauma team, I’d recommend paracetamol and an anti-infammatory like
ibuprofen but can prescribe something a little stronger if you need it.
➠ 368
Musculoskeletal Health – 2

-- 383 of 575 --

➠ 369	
Patient’s Story 	Knee Pain
Doctor’s notes Robert Hayes, 27 years. PMH: none. Medications: none.
How to act 	Pleasant but concerned.
PC 	‘I’ve injured my knee playing football.’
History 	Two days ago you were playing football. You felt something pop as you were changing
direction – your studs seemed to stick in the mud. Tere was no contact with another player
at the time. It was extremely painful and you could not continue the game. You applied ice
to your swollen knee and the swelling is still present. Te knee doesn’t lock but has given
way. You have had no previous knee injury. You have not been able to drive since the injury
despite taking paracetamol and ibuprofen. You also fnd it painful walking and weight
bearing.
Social 	You work as a project manager and enjoy running, badminton and football. You live with a
fatmate. If the doctor asks you about what impact this may have, you have recently broken
up with your long-term girlfriend and it wasn’t until the football season started that you
began to spend more time with your friends.
ICE 	You believe you may have torn a ligament.
You are worried that you will be ‘out for the season’.
You also fear you may need an operation. You fractured your ankle falling out of a tree as a
child and remember a lot of pain afer the operation. You would rather see a physio than be
referred to orthopaedics for this reason; however, you will follow the doctor’s advice. You
would like an MRI of your knee – if asked why, you think this would help a physiothera-
pist. If the doctor asks you about your understanding of the diagnosis, you remember that
Michael Owen couldn’t play in the 2006 World Cup due to a cruciate ligament injury. Te
doctor is giving you terrible news as you fear you will now be isolated from your friends
this season.
Examination 	Te lef knee is swollen with an efusion. Te knee is not hot or red. Tere is tenderness
along the medial side. Te anterior drawer test is positive. Te rest of the examination is
normal.
Musculoskeletal Health – 2

-- 384 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Knee Pain
Osteoarthritis – new diagnosis
Suspect arthritis if:1
• 	Age >45 years.
• 	Clinical features are suggestive.
• 	Alternative conditions have been excluded.
Diferential diagnosis includes gout/pseudogout, septic arthritis, infammatory arthritis, malignancy1 and
injury from trauma.
NICE CKS advise a holistic assessment of a person with OA: social situation and impact, health beliefs,
mood, quality of sleep, support network, other MSK pain, attitudes to exercise, infuence of comorbidity
and a full pain assessment.
GP management options include: NSAIDs, muscle-strengthening exercises, advice about aerobic ftness
and footwear, physiotherapy, steroids injection. Consider the additional need for TENS or aids.
Possible referral routes1
• 	Physiotherapy/MSK – strengthening exercises, manipulation, joint supports, joint injections.
• 	Occupational therapy – advice on helpful devices for DLAs to reduce strain on diferent joints.
• 	Podiatrist – biomechanical assessment, orthotics device.
• 	Orthopaedic surgeon (irrespective of patient’s age, BMI or comorbidities and BEFORE severe functional
limitations and/or pain if:
• 	symptoms (stifness, joint pain, functional Impairment) are not improving with primary care
management.
• 	QOL signifcantly afected.
• 	diagnosis is unclear or symptoms are atypical.
• 	symptoms suddenly get worse.
• 	Pain clinic if:
• 	pain uncontrolled despite optimised medical and/or surgical management.
• 	suspect chronic pain syndrome.
• 	Psychological services if comorbid depression or anxiety despite primary care management.
ACL injury
Mechanism 	Most commonly associated with a non-contact mechanism – ‘knee in and toe out’.2
Te risk is greater in females. 2
Injury triad 	Anterior cruciate ligament + medial collateral ligament + medial meniscus.
Acute injuries
Refer acute injuries to orthopaedics for assessment, imaging and management options.
NB: Immediate efusions following trauma/injury are ofen due to haemarthrosis which is associated with
more signifcant joint injuries. Have a low threshold for referral of such cases (possibly same day or urgently
to trauma/fracture clinic). If presenting as a chronic injury, you may be able to refer for direct access MRI
to guide diagnosis and management – check local protocols.
➠ 370
Musculoskeletal Health – 2

-- 385 of 575 --

➠ 371
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Shirley Warner 	72 years 	F
PMH 	Wrist fracture
Medications 	Codeine phosphate 30 mg
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	2 months ago: telephone consultation – codeine prescribed
following wrist fracture.
Investigations 	DEXA Score –2.7
Corrected calcium 2.36 mmol/L
Vitamin D 40 ng/mL
Household 	Tina Wright 	76 years 	F

-- 386 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Osteoporosis
Open ☐ 	Tank you for phoning. What led to you having this test?
Impact ☐ 	How is the arm? How has the broken arm afected you day to day?
Flags ☐ 	How did you fall? I see: when a break occurs afer a low-impact injury, we should check
the bone strength.
History ☐ 	Before I explain, may I learn more about you to help me interpret the result and what we
may need to do? Are you well? Any medical problems? Any medicines? How do you spend
your time? Who is at home? Any family history of medical problems?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had thoughts yourself about what the scan may show? Do you have any fears
about what I may say today? And what did you think I might suggest?
Risk ☐ 	What age was your menopause? Have you ever taken any steroid treatment? Do you smoke?
How much alcohol do you drink? Have you had any other broken bones?
Curious ☐ 	When you fell, had you been drinking any alcohol?
Sense ☐ 	You’ve mentioned your mum a few times. Her experience is important to you; what
happened?
Empathy ☐ 	I understand your fear of another fracture especially afer your mother’s experience.
O/E ☐ 	Can you tell me your weight and height?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, a low-impact fall caused a fracture which led to the scan. You suspect this
is due to low calcium which will need replacing and fear another fall, having watched your
mother sufer. Is this right?
Impression ☐ 	Te scan has confrmed that you have osteoporosis.
Experience ☐ 	Do you know anything about osteoporosis?
Explanation ☐ Osteoporosis means the bones are not as strong as they should be. Sometimes calcium
tablets are taken but actually your calcium levels are already good. Osteoporosis is a
lack of bone strength but not necessarily a lack of the nutrients such as calcium. Many
things lead to osteoporosis. In your case, I suspect it is a mixture of things such as being
a post-menopausal woman, an ex-smoker, drinking more than 14 units of alcohol a week
and having a family history of osteoporosis.
Options ☐ 	Tankfully there is treatment available which should reduce your risk of more broken bones in
the future. Alendronate is a tablet that prevents bone breakdown. It is taken once weekly. Like
all tablets there are potential side efects – for this tablet that includes heartburn, diarrhoea or
headaches. Tere are also risks: it can damage the jaw bone. Although this is rare, we recom-
mend seeing your dentist prior to starting treatment. To prevent acid refux, we advise taking
the tablet 30 minutes before your breakfast and any medication, with a full glass of water and
remain upright (either sitting or standing) for 30 minutes.
Recommend ☐ I suggest that I prescribe alendronate for you and will give you an information sheet which
explains again how to take the tablet. Are you happy to start this medication?
Empower ☐ 	We also need to consider your calcium and vitamin D. Your calcium blood test was normal
but your vitamin D was a bit low. To decide if you need extra calcium, we need to assess
your dietary intake of calcium. If it is low, we will give you a tablet with both calcium and
vitamin D. If it is adequate, you will only need vitamin D. Tis is because recent research
suggests that too much calcium can be harmful. Could I send you a questionnaire to fll out
about your diet? Tere are other things you can do to protect your bones such as reducing
your alcohol intake and doing weight-bearing exercises. I will email you a sheet of these
exercises.
Future ☐ 	Can we talk again in a couple of weeks to go through your questionnaire?
Specifcs ☐ 	We advise taking alendronate for 5 years initially and then we should review whether or
not you need to continue. You may be able to stop then, but we would arrange a scan 18
months to 3 years later to reassess.
Safety net ☐ 	With alendronate if you notice black stools, refux or heart burn, jaw pain or a loose tooth,
inform a GP.
➠ 372
Musculoskeletal Health – 3

-- 387 of 575 --

➠ 373	
Patient’s Story 	Osteoporosis
Doctor’s notes Shirley Warner, 72 years. DEXA Score –2.7. Corrected calcium 2.36 mmol/L. Vitamin D
40 ng/mL (low). PMH: wrist fracture 2 months ago. Medications: codeine phosphate 30 mg.
How to act 	Friendly.
PC 	‘Doctor, I’d like my scan result.’
History 	You were referred for a DEXA scan by the hospital doctor.
2 months ago, you fractured your wrist when you tripped on a kerb.
Your mother broke her hip when she was in her 80s.
‘Mum was low in calcium and took calcium tablets.’
You have no other medical history. You have taken no other medicines.
Te arm is improving.
Your menopause was aged 52 years.
Social 	You are a retired seamstress. You live with your partner, Tina.
You drink 16 units of alcohol a week.
You ‘tripped afer the golf party’ (3 glasses of wine).
You are an ex-smoker.
You enjoy yoghurt, full fat milk and eat very well.
You are happy to keep a food diary to calculate your calcium intake.
ICE 	You understand that you have weak bones lacking in calcium.
You are worried you will get a hip fracture like your mother.
Your mum was in hospital a long time and then had to start warfarin for a DVT.
You expect the doctor will start calcium tablets.
Examination 	Your BMI is 24.
Musculoskeletal Health – 3

-- 388 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Osteoporosis
+ Risk factors1 	♀, BMI <18.5, smoking, alcohol (units >14/week ♀ or ♂).
Previous fracture or history of falls, immobility, FH osteoporosis or hip #.
Medical comorbidity.
++ Risk factors 	Corticosteroids, premature menopause, previous osteoporotic fracture.
+++ Risk factors 	>7.5 mg prednisolone daily for >3 months (current or recent).
Previous major osteoporotic fracture.
Multiple fragility fractures.
Who do we screen ♀ >65 years or <65 years with any risk factor.
♂ >75 years or <75 years with any risk factor.
Anyone <50 years with a ++ or +++ risk factor OR <40 years with a +++ risk factor.
How do we screen?
1. History – is the patient at risk?
2. Calculate the FRAX score2 if aged 40–90 years or Q fracture3 if aged 30–84 years.
3. Once the data is inserted into the tool, use the link to NOGG4 to guide management:
• 	lifestyle advice (low risk)
• 	DEXA scan (intermediate risk) → recalculate risk with BMD
• 	start treatment (high risk).
>80 years ‘predicted 10-year fracture risk may underestimate their short-term fracture risk.’1
Assessment tools underestimate risk in: multiple #s or vertebral #, alcohol abuse, steroid Rx or comorbidities1
T score 	T score between –1 and –2.5 = osteopenia.
T score <–2.5 = osteoporosis.
For reversible causes consider testing: TSH, PTH, Ca2+, vitamin D, testosterone, LH and FSH to investigate
for hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, osteomalacia and hypogonadism respectively.
Who should have calcium and vitamin D replacement?
Due to new studies5 demonstrating the risks of calcium treatment, consider vitamin D replacement alone
if dietary calcium intake is >700 mg/day.6,7 ‘If calcium intake is inadequate:
• 	Prescribe 10 μg (400 μg) of vitamin D with at least 1000 mg of calcium daily. Prescribe 20 μg (800 μg) of
vitamin D with at least 1000 mg of calcium daily for people not exposed to much sunlight.’6
Who should have bisphosphonates?
NOGG guidance has indicated treatment is required or following a confrmed osteoporosis diagnosis.
For women, all bisphosphonates are licensed but, for men, only alendronate (OD tablets) and risedronate
(once-weekly tablets).6
Te following is recommended reading: counselling prior to bisphosphonate use – see reference.8
Also, for information regarding treatment in post-menopausal women – see reference.9
Patient.info has a useful patient leafet on how to take alendronic acid.10
Management of osteopenia
Lifestyle: smoking, exercise and weight-bearing exercises.
Test bone profle, albumin, U&E, LFT, FBC, ESR and TSH. Rescan 2–3 years.
➠ 374
Musculoskeletal Health – 3

-- 389 of 575 --

➠ 375
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Selina Richards 	31 years 	F
PMH 	No known medical history
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Alexander Richards 	8 years 	M
Maria Richards 	6 years 	F
Amelia Richards 	5 years 	F

-- 390 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Plantar Fasciitis
Open ☐ 	Please tell me the story of the pain from when you frst noticed it. Anything else you have
noticed? When does the pain come and go?
Impact ☐ 	And since this problem started, what has the pain stopped you from doing?
Flags ☐ 	Have you noticed any swelling or redness? Can you move the ankle and foot normally?
Risk ☐ 	Have you ever had any injury in the past?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had any thoughts as to what may be causing it? What worries have gone through
your mind? Is there anything else you hoped we would arrange today?
History ☐ 	Any medical problems? Have you tried any pain relief yet? I’m interested to know more
about you.
Sense ☐ 	So this has come at a very difcult time for you?
Curious ☐ 	What did your friend suggest?
O/E ☐ 	I would like to see you at the surgery to examine your foot and ankle; I would ask you to
remove your socks and shoes and feel the area under the foot. Would that be okay? Are you
free at 4 p.m.?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have told me that the pain in the right foot has been building over a
month but, especially in this past week, it has stopped you from walking the dog, something
that you enjoy, but have also had to do more since you have separated from your husband.
You wondered if it was gout.
Impression ☐ 	I think, from what I have heard so far, that it may be a condition called plantar fasciitis
causing your pain. I’ll be able to confrm this when I examine you later. Have you come
across this condition before?
Explanation ☐ Te plantar fascia is a sheet of tissue which supports the bones of your foot. Sometimes it
can become painful and infamed. It may be triggered by an increase in physical activity.
Another possibility would be gout but from what you tell me, your foot is not red, hot or
swollen. Te site of the pain is typical of plantar fasciitis.
InCludE ☐ 	X-rays do not show this infammation so are unlikely to be helpful.
Empathy ☐ 	Tis is an additional stress, especially as the dog is whining and you have three children to
care for. I also hear that you are very fond of the dog. I appreciate why you feel you need
to fx this problem straight away. Te problem can unfortunately take many months to
settle completely. However, if we confrm that this is what is wrong, I would have some
suggestions.
Empower ☐ 	Te ibuprofen could be changed for a tablet which is slightly stronger and lasts 12 hours,
called naproxen. You take one tablet twice a day but, like ibuprofen, it can irritate your
stomach lining so stop it if this becomes a problem. Tere is a useful exercise for PF too. Te
exercise aims to stretch the tissue to help the repairing process. It uses a frozen litre drinks
bottle. Put the bottle under the arch of your foot and roll the bottle forwards and backwards.
Te movement helps stretch the tissue and the ice helps reduce pain and swelling. Te more
you do, the sooner it will improve but, like any exercise, time is needed. Padded footwear
can also help.
Options ☐ 	When I see you, if the examination confrms plantar fasciitis, I can give you a PIL which
explains all this. It also mentions steroid injections into the feet, which is an option, but
some do not fnd it efective and there are risks to injecting in the foot, such as infection
or injury to the tendons there. We therefore don’t recommend the injections as frst line.
What are your thoughts about what I have said?
Future ☐ 	How do you feel about coming down at 4 p.m. and we can have a look at your foot and take
it from there?
Specifcs ☐ 	Just to let you know about other options if your foot does not start to improve soon – we
could think about either physiotherapy, which we can arrange in-house, or the injections,
which one of my colleagues can do. See you soon!
Musculoskeletal Health – 4	
➠ 376

-- 391 of 575 --

➠ 377	
Patient’s Story 	Plantar Fasciitis
Doctor’s notes Selina Richards, 31 years. PMH: none. Medications: none.
How to act 	Slightly pushy for the doctor to fx this problem.
PC 	‘It’s a pain in my foot – it’s a nightmare.’
History 	You walk your dog every morning and recently have pain in the right foot whilst walking.
You have had no injury or swelling.
You started to notice this a month ago and over the past week you have had enough of this
discomfort. You have always been well. Ibuprofen only helps slightly. You drink minimal
alcohol and don’t smoke.
Social 	You do not work. You have three children and a dog.
Your children are all in primary school.
Your husband has just lef the marriage and he used to walk the dog in a morning.
You spend your days meeting your friends, doing housework, dog-sitting and food shopping
for your mother. Financially you have always been very lucky and have never worked since
you were married. You would like to have a job but don’t know how or where. You are going
to volunteer at the school with cooking classes.
ICE 	Your friend told you that the problem may be gout as she had the same thing and you have
not had an injury. Terefore, you expect the doctor will give you colchicine, the tablet your
friend was given. You would also like a blood test and an X-ray. You plan to pay for a dog
walker, but will miss the time out of the house with the dog.
Impact 	Te dog has been whining as you couldn’t walk him and you need to get this sorted straight
away. Apart from walking the dog, the pain has not stopped you from doing anything
else. You are coping well without your husband; he was always away on business anyway.
Te divorce proceedings, however, are stressful. You also want to keep the dog and fear
your husband will want him if he is not being walked. You have never come across plantar
fasciitis.
Examination 	No swelling or abnormality of the foot, ankle or Achilles tendon. Tender at the plantar
surface of the calcaneus.
Musculoskeletal Health – 4

-- 392 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Differential Diagnosis – Foot Pain
Soft tissue 	Chronic heel pad infammation ‘Warm dull throbbing pain over weight-bearing area of
the heel… worse when frst getting up.’1
Acute synovitis 	Trobbing pain made worse by movement.1
Rule out systemic causes.
Acute infammation of anterior metatarsal heads
Common in women wearing slip-on/heeled shoe.
Burning and throbbing on walking.1
Plantar metatarsal bursitis 	‘Trobbing pain under the metatarsal head… persists at
rest and exacerbated when the area if frst loaded.’1
Bone 	Fracture 	Has there been impact? Use the Ottawa rules.2
Stress fracture (march fracture) Palpable tender lump.
Osteoarthritis 	Common at 1st MTPJ, tarsus joints and midfoot.1
Rheumatoid arthritis 	Swelling and deformity, may describe walking on pebbles
due to swelling/subluxation.1
Sever’s disease 	E.g. boys 8–13 years and exacerbated by jumping.1
Hallux valgus 	Great toe moves towards/overlies the 2nd toe.1
Bunion 	Infamed and painful metatarsal head.1
Red hot 	Gout
Septic arthritis 	Requires urgent aspiration/culture/Rx.
Nerve 	Morton’s neuroma 	Burning and numbness… ofen the 3rd/4th toe.1
Peripheral neuropathy 	E.g. tarsal tunnel or 2° to ↓B12, alcohol or DM.
Arterial 	Ischaemia 	Absent pulses, signs of PVD and check ABPIs.
Gout
Risk factors 	Tiazides, ACEI, alcohol, obesity.
Do not start allopurinol during an acute attack.
But, if already taking allopurinol or febuxostat, do not stop this during an acute attack.3
Acute medication3 	1st line NSAID (diclofenac, indometacin or naproxen) + PPI
2nd line colchicine
3rd line if NSAIDs contraindicated – consider systemic corticosteroids
When initiating allopurinol, consider a course of NSAID or colchicine. If in 2/12 you need to ↑ the allopu-
rinol give another overlap of colchicine to prevent an acute attack as the urate levels ↓ again.
Uric acid levels 	Measure 4–6 weeks afer an acute attack.
Aim for normal levels of uric acid if the decision has been made to start allopurinol.
Self-management3 	Rest, avoid trauma, keep the joint cool. Lifestyle: reduce alcohol, weight loss and dietary
changes and avoid dehydration.
➠ 378
Musculoskeletal Health – 4

-- 393 of 575 --

➠ 379
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	David Meadows 	47 years 	M
PMH 	Cruciate ligament injury
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 394 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Shoulder Pain
Open ☐ 	Mr Meadows, how can I help? Shall we start from when you frst noticed the problem?
Flags ☐ 	Have you had an injury? Any pain elsewhere – chest, neck or arm? What are you doing
when the pain comes on? Which movements specifcally? Does other activity cause pain?
Does it wake you?
Impact ☐ 	Are you having to do anything diferently? Is it stopping you do anything else?
Risk ☐ 	Have you ever damaged the shoulder?
History ☐ 	I see you have injured your knee. Any other medical problems? Tell me more about you.
ICE ☐ 	What do you think has caused this? Is there anything else you have been wondering? Is
there anything else you are worried about? What did you think I might say we should do
today? Is there anything specifc you would like to be done today?
Curious ☐ 	Has someone you know had a shoulder pain that was from their heart?
Sense ☐ 	You seem very disappointed about having to stop golf.
O/E ☐ 	Please can you remove your top so that I may feel your shoulder, neck and arm and check
their movements?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, 2 weeks of shoulder pain is now afecting you daily. You wonder whether this may be
caused by golf or from arthritis. You wanted to clarify that this is not coming from your
heart. You fear it will prevent you from playing in the golf competition. You wondered
whether an X-ray would be helpful.
Impression ☐ 	I believe you have painful arc syndrome. Tis pain is not coming from your heart. I can
reassure you of this because it is painful moving the shoulder joint but not when exercising.
Experience ☐ 	Other names for it are tendonitis or impingement. Have you come across painful arc?
Explanation ☐ Te problem lies within the shoulder at the tendons. Tendons attach the shoulder muscles
to the arm. Tere is a narrow tunnel in the shoulder for these tendons to pass through.
Repeated use or an injury can cause swelling of the tendon or wear and tear of the bones
that form the tunnel. Both make the narrow tunnel smaller. Lifing the arm makes this
space smaller again. Tis causes friction and is why you get pain with that movement.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate the need to fx the shoulder quickly. I will try but I fear 6 weeks is optimistic.
InCludE ☐ 	You wondered about an X-ray. As tendons don’t show up on X-rays this is unlikely to be
helpful at the moment, but further down the line we could consider an ultrasound scan.
Options ☐ 	Reduce the infammation with anti-infammatory tablets. If this doesn’t help, a steroid
injection may be benefcial. Secondly, I suggest you rest your shoulder from heavy exer-
cise but perform some physio exercises. Holding a weight, like a can of beans, in the right
hand directly below the shoulder, leaning to that side and then make circle movements
can help. Tis helps to increase that gap. Should we try a 2-week trial of exercises and
anti-infammatories?
Future ☐ 	If it is not on the mend, consider the steroid injection guided by an USS and physiotherapy.
What are your thoughts? I will send you a PIL with this and other exercises. Any questions?
Empower ☐ 	With the exercises, the more you do, the sooner you will notice a diference.
Safety net ☐ 	I will prescribe some naproxen, an anti-infammatory which is stronger than ibuprofen and
lasts longer, so is taken every 12 hours with food. Like any tablet it has its risks, including
tummy ulcers, so let me know if it is causing tummy pain. Inform me if you develop shoul-
der swelling.
➠ 380
Musculoskeletal Health – 5

-- 395 of 575 --

➠ 381	
Patient’s Story 	Shoulder Pain
Doctor’s notes David Meadows, 47 years. PMH: cruciate ligament injury. Medications: none.
How to act 	Relaxed and pleasant.
PC 	‘I’ve done something to my shoulder doctor.’
History 	Right shoulder pain (no radiation) began slowly 2 weeks ago. No specifc injury.
It is painful inside the shoulder especially when raising the arm: 5/10 severity of pain.
You have still managed to cycle on your cycling machine to keep ft without discomfort.
No neurological symptoms in the arm and no problem at the neck or elbow.
You once injured your knee playing football.
You have otherwise been well.
You are very active and never have any chest pains.
Tere are no contraindications to starting an NSAID.
Impact 	It has stopped you from playing golf. You are right-handed.
You fear having to pull out of a competition in 6 weeks which you have been looking forward
to.
It is not painful at night.
You are struggling to wash your hair so you are leaning forward and using your lef hand.
Social 	Work for local council – the GP practice is near your ofce.
Wife and two children at home. Occasional alcohol. Never smoked.
ICE 	You wonder if this could be arthritis or maybe you have injured it playing golf.
At the back of your mind, you hope it isn’t your heart.
You have heard heart pain can be in the shoulder or arm.
You have heard this from an old boss whilst he was telling you about his heart attack.
You expect the doctor will send you for an X-ray and give you some pain relief.
Examination 	Allow the doctor to examine you.
No swelling or deformity.
Te shoulder is not hot. Painful arc at 30 degrees.
Pain on lifing the arm against resisted movement and reaching to the back.
Te neck and elbow are normal.
Musculoskeletal Health – 5

-- 396 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Shoulder Pain
The three joints of the shoulder Sternoclavicular, acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joint.
The four rotator cuff muscles 	Supraspinatus (initiation of abduction)
Infraspinatus (external rotation)
Teres minor (also external rotation)
Subscapularis (internal rotation)
Tese join together to form the rotator cuf tendon which travels through the sub-acromial space.
Rotator cuf tendonitis1,2 is where infammation which causes impingement (where the tendon becomes
trapped) reduces the range of movement, hence a painful arc. For example, if there is a supraspinatus ten-
donitis there is compression of the supraspinatus tendon between the humeral head and acromion.
Causes: tendonitis secondary to an injury or repetitive strain or calcium deposits.
Sub-acromial space narrowing: bony spurs from wear and tear or enlargement of the bursa.
An USS may be helpful to diagnose and guide a steroid injection. It may also diagnose tears in the rotator
cuf tendons, some of which require surgical repair. Most tendonitis settles with rest, physio and NSAIDs/
steroid injection. Occasionally (e.g. if chronic/bony spurs) arthroscopic decompression is necessary.
Frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis)3 is generalised infammation within the capsule, which causes
pain and limits any ROM of the glenohumeral joint. It usually afects the non-dominant shoulder. Frozen
shoulder may occur afer rotator cuf injury or spontaneously and the cause is unknown. Tere are typically
three phases:
1. 	‘Painful freezing’ stage – most painful stage with gradual loss of movement, may last up to 9 months.
2. 	‘Frozen/adhesive stage’ – reduced movement but less painful, lasts up to 1 year.
3. 	‘Tawing/recovery phase’ – gradual return to normal function which may take 1–3 years.
Tell patients that symptoms may last between 18 months and 3 years, although the vast majority of patients
have recovered by 2 years. Te treatment is physiotherapy. A steroid injection may be helpful within the frst
8 weeks. Patients with diabetes or thyroid conditions have an increased risk of a bilateral frozen shoulder.
Osteoarthritis: In an older patient it may be helpful to see if there is OA present.
Dislocations usually occur afer an impact injury.
Consider referred pain from the diaphragm (ruptured ectopic pregnancy) or heart (MI).
If unable to abduct the shoulder the frst 10 degrees, consider a complete tear of the supraspinatus and speak
to a specialist about arranging a clinic appointment.
If you give a PIL, always describe what is in it.
➠ 382
Musculoskeletal Health – 5

-- 397 of 575 --

CHAPTER 16 OVERVIEW
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual
and Social Disability
➠ 383
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual
and Social Disability
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Need for
Procedure
‘Be aware of the concept of diagnostic
overshadowing…’
Elderly parents
Diagnostic overshadowing
2 	Down Syndrome 	‘Genetic causes of intellectual disability…
Down syndrome’
‘Annual health checks’
‘Effects of intellectual disability on the
ageing process, particularly in relation to the
development and recognition of dementia’
The annual health check
Issues specifc to the condition/
life stage
3 	Autism and
Transition
Process
‘Common and important conditions – autism
and autism spectrum disorders’
‘Support for adolescents transitioning from
paediatric to adult care’
Transition Process Model
4 	Mental Health
and Intellectual
Disability
‘Atypical presentation of psychiatric
problems because of sensory, communication
and cognitive diffculties’
‘Impact on family dynamics including
parenting experiences’
Psychiatric disorders prevalent
in the adult with intellectual
disability
Questions to carers
5 	COCP Request 	‘Safeguarding of vulnerable adults… and the
ethics of caring for people with intellectual
disability’
‘Equal rights of all citizens to healthcare,
health information and health promotion’
‘Emotional and sexual needs of adults with
intellectual and social disabilities and how
they may be expressed’
‘Risk of sexual… abuse’
Risk factors for safeguarding
adults
Extra
Notes
Assessing
Capacity
‘An understanding of legislation and guidance
on mental capacity’
‘Mental capacity assessment and associated
legislation’
Assessing capacity

-- 398 of 575 --

CHAPTER 16 REFERENCES
Need for Procedure
1. 	Hubert J., Hollins S. People with Intellectual Disabilities and Teir Elderly Carers. http://www.intellectualdisability.
info/life-stages/people-with-intellectual-disabilities-and-their-elderly-carers
2. 	Dowling S.F. Bereavement in the Lives of People with Intellectual Disabilities. http://www.intellectualdisability.info/
life-stages/bereavement-in-the-lives-of-people-with-intellectual-disabilities
Down Syndrome
1. 	Holland T. Ageing and Its Consequences for People with Down Syndrome. http://www.intellectualdisability.info/
life-stages/ageing-and-its-consequences-for-people-with-downs-syndrome
2. 	Trumble T. People with Down Syndrome at All Ages: Some Tips for Family Physicians. http://www.intellectualdis-
ability.info/life-stages/people-with-downs-syndrome-at-all-age-some-tips-for-family-physicians
3. 	Dr Matt Hoghton and the RCGP Learning Disabilities Group. A Step-by-Step Guide for GP Practices. Annual Health
Checks for People with Disabilities. http://www.rcgp.org.uk/learningdisabilities/~/media/Files/CIRC/CIRC-76-80/
CIRCA%20StepbyStepGuideforPracticesOctober%2010.ashx
Autism and Transition Process
1. 	Barron D.A., Coyle D., Paliokosta E., Hassiotis A. Transition for Children with Intellectual Disabilities. http://www.
intellectualdisability.info/life-stages/transition-for-children-with-intellectual-disabilities
Mental Health and Intellectual Disability
1. 	Department of Health. Valuing People: A New Strategy for Learning Disability for the 21st Century. 2001.
2. 	RCGP Curriculum 2019 – Clinical Topic Guides: Neurodevelopmental disorders, intellectual and social disability.
COCP Request
1. 	RCGP Curriculum 2019 – Clinical Topic Guides: Neurodevelopmental disorders, intellectual and social disability.
Useful Resource
https://centralsexualhealth.org/contraception/easy-read-leafets/
Assessing Capacity
1. 	https://www.bma.org.uk/advice-and-support/ethics/adults-who-lack-capacity/mental-capacity-act-toolkit
Tere are many potential social inequalities for a patient with an intellectual disability, including access
to healthcare, fnancial issues and educational opportunities. Te potential barriers to healthcare include
accessing services, communication, using online services, appointment times, patient’s fear or a lack of staf
training. Te responsibilities of the GP include being proactive with setting up a system which provides
patients with equal access to healthcare. Tis may include a patient register, recall system, a team leader, staf
education, regular communication with speciality teams and fexible appointment times. Te system should
ensure clinicians have the time required to gain an understanding of the patient and their carer’s challenges,
concerns and needs. Te GP should be vigilant for atypical presentations of physical conditions, emotional
(fear, frustration and loneliness) or psychological concerns and the potential problems which occur within
a time of transition in the patient’s life. Te systemic enquiry should be appropriate to the patient’s life stage.
An understanding of the patient’s social circumstances is essential to efectively screen for isolation, neglect
and abuse. Health promotion and when and how to seek help should be discussed. Be aware of local services
and provide information which is easy to read. Te carer’s health and well-being should also be explored.
In-practice time and follow-ups are needed for a full assessment. Cutting corners cannot be an option.
Remember that the GP may be the only person asking the questions and acting as an advocate for the patient.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 384
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability

-- 399 of 575 --

➠ 385
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Henry Sutton 	60 years 	M
PMH 	Hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy
Seizures (seizure-free 30 years)
Hearing difculty. Hearing aids
Myopia
Learning difculties (IQ 45)
Attention defcit hyperactivity disorder
Gastro-oesophageal refux disease
Medications 	Omeprazole 40 mg
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	Last consultations: 1 month ago when omeprazole was prescribed.
Investigations 	Blood test Helicobacter pylori negative.
Hb 105 g/L, otherwise FBC normal.
U&E, LFT, amylase, CRP, HbA1c, FBG – all normal.
Weight 65 kg 1 year ago
Household 	Rosemary Sutton 	88 years 	F
Henry attends with mother Rosemary.

-- 400 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Need for Procedure
Open ☐ 	Hello. Tank you for coming to see me. Today we will have a chat about how you are, I will ask
you some questions and you can ask me questions at any time. If you don’t mind, I may need
to examine you, then we will have a chat about what happens next. Is that okay? Who have you
brought with you today? Henry, can you tell me what has been hurting you? Can you tell me
why you had the tests? When does it hurt?
History ☐ 	Can you point to where you feel the pain? Does it make you sick? Does it make you burp? When
you have the pain, what do you do? Does that help? Do you take any other medicines? Who do
you live with, Henry? What do you do during the daytime? Who do you tell if you do not feel
well?
Risk ☐ 	Do you smoke? Do you drink alcohol? Do you like cofee or tea? Is there anyone in the family
who has a problem in the tummy?
Flags ☐ 	Have you lost weight, Henry? Do you ever spit your food out because it hasn’t gone down into
the tummy? Are you coughing lots? Have you felt shivery or hot and cold? Henry, what colour is
your poo? Is it ever red like blood or black? Is your poo hard, sof or like water? When you have
a wee is that okay or does it hurt? Do you go to the toilet lots to have a wee, or is it the same as
always do you think?
Impact ☐ 	Have you stopped eating as much since this pain started?
ICE ☐ 	Henry, why do you think you have tummy pain? Are you worried about it? Why are you worried?
What did you and your mum think we may decide today? Rosemary, what do you think may be
causing this? What are you mostly worried about? What did you hope I might suggest?
Curious ☐ 	Henry, do you know what your mum means by the ‘big C’? Have you talked about what you
think?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, Henry, you have told me that for a few months you have had pain in the tummy;
this has been making you burp but also lose weight. You want some more medicine to make it
better. Your mum is worried it could be something serious and thinks you need more tests.
O/E ☐ 	Can I ask you to step on the scales, Henry? Now, may I feel your tummy and can you tell me if
it hurts when I press? Can I feel your pulse and take your temperature?
Impression ☐ 	It sounds like this could be a tummy ulcer. Have you had an ulcer in your mouth? Tis is similar
but in the tummy. To give us an answer we need to have a look at diferent parts of the tummy
to see where the problem is. Sometimes an ulcer or pain can be there because of a cancer.
Sense ☐ 	I can see you are upset.
Experience ☐ 	Have you seen anyone with cancer? What do you know about it?
Explanation ☐ 	Tat can happen but we can also fx it and make it better if we know what it is. Te bacteria blood
test came back normal but you are anaemic which means your blood count is low.
Empathy ☐ 	Mentioning the big C can be scary, especially when your gran had it. I have to make sure we’ve
done all the right tests to make sure we know what needs to be done to make you better.
Options ☐ 	I agree that a jelly scan of your tummy will give us more clues. I also think we should look into
the tummy.
Recommend ☐ Henry, I suggest we do this by making you sleepy then putting a thin tube with a light into the
tummy. Would that be okay? If we see what is causing the pain, we can hopefully make it better.
Future ☐ 	Whatever it is, we can talk about it again soon.
Empower ☐ 	If ever you feel hot and shivery please will you tell someone?
Specifcs ☐ 	You should receive the appointment for the jelly scan and tube test within 2 weeks then I
will see you the week afer. If you don’t receive these tests in that time, please let me know.
Rosemary – please would you book the appointment to see me? Is that all okay?
Safety net ☐ 	If you have a high temperature or if you see red or black in the toilet, or you are sick or have
really bad pain, you need to tell the warden and they need to call a doctor. Rosemary could you
pass that on?
➠ 386
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 1

-- 401 of 575 --

➠ 387	
Patient’s Story 	Need for Procedure
Doctor’s notes Henry Sutton, 60 years. (Attends with mother Rosemary.)
PMH: hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy, seizures (seizure-free 30 years), hearing difculty,
hearing aids, myopia, learning difculties (IQ 45), attention defcit hyperactivity disorder,
GORD. Medications: omeprazole 40 mg.
Blood tests: H. pylori negative, Hb 105 g/dL. Te rest of the FBC, U&E, LFT, amylase, CRP,
HbA1c, FBG – all normal. Weight: 65 kg 1 year ago.
How to act 	You are able to answer some questions, but you frequently turn to your mother who either
answers for you or repeats the question if the doctor is not being clear.
PC 	Mum: 	‘Henry has come for the results of his blood test.’
History 	Henry: 	‘I keep getting tummy pain … above the belly button.’ You can’t describe a pattern.
No vomiting. If the doctor asks, say: ‘My poo is normal.’ No melaena or dysphagia.
Mum: 	‘I noticed he was losing weight.’
‘He keeps telling me he has pain in his stomach.’ Tis has been the case for months.
Henry came of all his medicines for ADHD in his late teens, followed by his
seizure medications. He has been well since. Tere is no signifcant family history.
He is ofen belching and he fnds this funny. Te omeprazole alone doesn’t seem
to have helped. Henry doesn’t drink cafeine or alcohol. He takes no medicines
and specifcally, no ibuprofen. Henry is happy. When the pain is there, you give
Henry Gaviscon. It helps a bit, he says.
Social 	Henry: 	You moved to sheltered accommodation 15 years ago where you made friends.
Your mother visits twice a week. You do not smoke or drink alcohol. No tea/cofee.
You do not work but help out in the laundry shop for the residents. Tere is
always a warden on call. You know you can just press the button on the receiver
if you need help. You are able to prepare very simple meals such as cereal and
sandwiches but have help from staf with hot food.
Mum: 	He eats a very good diet and enjoys going for walks every day with the staf.
ICE 	Henry: 	You don’t know why you have the pain. You just want it to stop.
You think the doctor will give you some more medicine.
Mum: 	‘I am worried it’s something serious.’ If asked to explain ‘the big C’.
You have not told your thoughts to Henry. You would like the doctor to arrange an
ultrasound. Te other doctor said it might be bacteria, in which case Henry will be given
antibiotics. If the doctor starts to talk about the possibility of cancer, Henry becomes dis-
tressed. If asked more about this, Henry says, ‘People die.’ His granny died in her 80s of
lung cancer. If the doctor uses jargon, Henry doesn’t want the test. If the doctor empathises
and explains why endoscopy is important, Henry agrees.
O/E 	Weight 55 kg. Slightly tender epigastrium. Otherwise normal.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 1

-- 402 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Need for Procedure
When beginning a consultation with a person with intellectual disabilities, it is a good idea to set out what
is likely to happen in the consultation. Te patient may not be familiar with the consultation process and it
can reduce anxiety to explain at the beginning. As with children, address your questions to the patient rather
than their carer. Be guided by the language the patient and their carer use, to help you use language and
terminology that the patient understands. You may need to slow the consultation pace to allow the patient
time to absorb what you have said and think of their answer. Be patient; if you aren’t understood at frst,
think of diferent ways to explain what you mean rather than giving up. Be aware that some patients with
intellectual disabilities take what you say very literally so sometimes using similes/metaphors can add to
the confusion! Remember, you can get packs of picture cards which help patients explain their symptoms,
e.g. happy/sad faces, body parts, toilets, etc.
Points to be aware of
‘Elderly parents are ofen unaware of community support now available to adults with intellectual disabilities.
A mutually dependent relationship may have developed according to their needs and capabilities. Parents
may not ask for help for fear their son or daughter will be taken into care. Elderly parents are ofen socially
isolated. Tey may be less observant of health changes in their son or daughter.
Comorbid medical conditions are common, but easily overlooked unless actively screened for.
Planning for the future should include recognising inevitable separation by death, and the need to anticipate
emotional as well as practical needs.
When people with intellectual disabilities have moved to a home of their own, sustained efort by the new
carers is needed to support continuing contact with elderly parents.’1
‘When a person with intellectual disabilities loses a parent through death, it is not only a loss of someone
who is loved, but is also the loss of the person most familiar with their needs, their likes and dislikes, and
with whom they shared a trusting relationship.’2
Diagnostic overshadowing
‘Be aware of the concept of diagnostic overshadowing when a person’s presenting symptoms are put down
to the disability, rather than the doctor seeking another, potentially treatable cause.’3
What are the reasons for this? 	Time: 10–12-minute consultations, doctor uncertainty, communication
barriers, atypical presentations, lack of continuity – the doctor and patient
do not know each other.
How can this be prevented? 	GP and healthcare education: early screening for physical and mental
health problems. Annual reviews. Carer and family education: vigilance
for a change in the person and involving the carers in safety netting advice.
Time (a recurrent theme) and longer appointments.
➠ 388
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 1

-- 403 of 575 --

➠ 389
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Matthew Dalton 	24 years 	M
PMH 	Down syndrome
Closure ASD
Sensorineural deafness. Hearing aids.
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered
Patient attending for annual review.

-- 404 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Down Syndrome
Open ☐ 	How are you, Matthew? What is going well for you? What has been difcult this year?
Empathy ☐ 	I’m sorry to hear that. Do you miss her? Do you cry when you think of her?
Sense ☐ 	You mentioned your mum told you to see me… is your mum worried about anything?
Curious ☐ 	Why don’t you like going to the doctor? What can you remember? Tat must have been horrible.
Today I would just like to talk and examine you. Tat’s it for today. If either of us is worried
about anything we can talk about it and decide together. We won’t do anything without your
permission. Is that okay?
Sense ☐ 	Is your ear okay? Why do you keep touching it? Can you hear okay with your hearing aid?
History ☐ 	Can you remember what health problems you have had in the past? Are you feeling well or is
something not right? Can we go through the body to see if you have had any problems? Let’s
start at the top – do you have any headaches? Can you see everything okay? When did you last
have your eyes checked? Can you hear okay? How ofen do you feel out of breath? Do you have
any other strange feelings in your chest? Does your back hurt? Do your arms and legs feel okay?
How ofen do you go for a wee? Does it ever hurt? How ofen do you have a poo? Is the poo
hard like stones, sof or runny? Does anywhere hurt? Have you seen the dentist this year? Who
do you live with? What do you do during the day? You have a job: that’s great! Do you enjoy it?
Do you have friends who live nearby? Do you have a girlfriend or boyfriend? Is it going well?
What do you enjoy doing on your own? It sounds like you are very independent.
Flags ☐ 	Are you happy or sad most of the time? Do you worry about anything?
ICE ☐ 	What did you think we might talk about today? Why do you think your ear is hurting? Is there
anything you would like me to help with?
SummarICE ☐ 	So it sounds as if you have had an upsetting time with losing your gran but Laura has made you
feel happy. Your hearing aid is rubbing and you would like a new one.
O/E ☐ 	Every year we ofer an examination so we can check your health. I would like to check your
weight and height, look in your ears, listen to your heart and lungs, take your blood pressure, feel
your neck, feel your tummy and check your testicles. Do you know where the testicles are? Tese
are the two round parts that are under the penis. Tis would involve removing your underpants
but it is important so I can check there are no lumps or bumps. Would that be okay? I need a
chaperone so I will ask Suzie, our nurse, to come in whilst I examine you. Is that okay?
Impression ☐ 	Your ear is infected. Tere is also a little lump on the testicle.
Explanation ☐ 	We commonly fnd lumps, most are nothing to worry about, but we need to check it with a scan.
Te scan is in the hospital. It won’t hurt and all you will feel is cold jelly. It is important to make
sure that the lump is not a cancer. Usually it isn’t.
Options ☐ 	Can I arrange this for you? For the ear, please use the spray called Otomize three times a day
for a week and let me know if it is still hurting in a week. I will write to the hearing aid team to
request they see you to talk about a new one.
Empower ☐ 	Matthew, your weight is a little high. Do you do any exercise? What exercise would you most
like to do? Who cooks your meals? Do you know which foods can be bad for you? Would you
like to lose weight? Do you think you could cut out some crisps, biscuits and cakes? I will ask
our nurse to see you to discuss diet in more detail.
Future ☐ 	It would also be helpful to do your annual blood test. Oh dear, do you not like blood tests? It is
important to monitor your blood to make sure you’re healthy. If I ask the nurse to use a small
needle would that help? I can give you some cream to make your skin numb so you won’t feel
it, if you like? It is a good idea to do exercise together with Laura. Would you like me to write
down what we have decided to do next?
Specifcs ☐ 	Shall we see you in 3 months to see how you are getting on? I will send you a text message to
remind you about the date. If the scan or blood tests show anything more urgent, we will let you
know.
Safety net ☐ 	If you don’t receive the appointment for your scan in the next 2 weeks, please speak to me. If
you’re worried about anything or feel unwell, please let me know.
➠ 390
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 2

-- 405 of 575 --

➠ 391	
Patient’s Story 	Down Syndrome
Doctor’s notes Matthew Dalton, 24 years. PMH: Down syndrome, closure ASD, sensorineural deafness.
Hearing aids. Medication: none.
How to act 	Pleasant but quiet. Keep touching your ear.
PC 	‘My mum said I have to have my yearly check-up.’
History 	‘I don’t like coming to the doctors.’
If asked why say: ‘Because I always had to go to the doctors.’
If asked why, say: ‘Operations hurt.’
Only if asked about your ear, ‘It hurts.’ No other ear symptoms.
No other symptoms on systemic enquiry.
You saw the dentist and optician a month ago.
Social 	You live with your mum. You do not know your dad.
You do not smoke or drink alcohol. You work in the hardware store.
You have been saving money and hope to buy a house one day.
Your girlfriend’s name is Laura. Laura has Down syndrome.
You met at a party 3 months ago and you look pleased when you tell the doctor this.
Your gran died earlier in the year. You cried a lot but not since you met Laura.
Your mum makes your meals. You eat an unhealthy diet. You do not exercise.
If encouraged to think about how you could be healthier, suggest going swimming with
Laura and say you will tell your mum what the doctor said.
You would be interested in losing weight.
ICE 	If the doctor mentions any new medical conditions, say you don’t know.
Have no understanding of any medical problems.
However, if the doctor says you need tests say: ‘I don’t want a blood test.’
If the doctor explains in simple language why you need tests, agree.
You are worried that your hearing aid is rubbing. You would like a new one.
You don’t know what the doctor will want to talk to you about.
Your mum said the doctor will do a blood test. (Wrinkle your nose at this.)
Examination 	Te ear canal is eczematous and discharging. Te tympanic membrane is normal. No sur-
rounding swelling or lymphadenopathy. Apyrexial. HR 82 bpm. BP 116/62. BMI is 31.
Te skin is normal. HS normal. Chest clear.
Tere is a <1 cm lump on the lower pole of the lef testicle.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 2

-- 406 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Down Syndrome
Practices are encouraged to have a ‘Learning Disability register’. Tis helps ensure that all patients with intel-
lectual disabilities have an annual review. It is a good idea to send out a questionnaire before the appointment
for the patient to complete with their carer. If your practice adopts this approach, make sure you ask to see
the questionnaire at the appointment!
Te annual health check should include:
• 	Health screening: observations, weight, height, urine dip, discussion about smoking, alcohol, drugs,
diet and exercise, breast or testicular awareness, cervical screening, CVD screening (BMI, BP and blood
tests).
• 	Social assessment: dependence and independence. Discussion regarding social skills.
• 	Vulnerability assessment: risk of abuse (neglect, physical, sexual, emotional).
• 	Advice regarding check-ups: vision (e.g. for cataracts), hearing (e.g. for SNHL) and dental.
• 	Systemic enquiry looking for undiagnosed problems (see below).
• 	Full physical examination: top to toe approach including ears, neck, chest, abdomen, genitalia, skin,
nails, etc.
• 	Mental health assessment.
Discussion of potential issues specifc to the condition and life stage, e.g.
with Down syndrome:1,2
Congenital 	Heart disease, hypothyroidism, dislocation of the hip and cataracts.
Childhood 	Signs of developmental delay, duodenal atresia, pyloric stenosis, Hirschsprung’s disease.
Constipation and tracheo-oesophageal fstulae.
Hearing and visual impairment.
Symptoms of hypothyroidism (may be congenital or acquired). Ongoing cardiac conditions.
Atlantoaxial instability: have they had X-rays?
Once diagnosed – neurological assessments.
Ask about schooling.
Adolescence 	Growth and obesity. Dental care.
Menstruation may be slightly delayed. Annual TFTs. Skin and hair.
Late adult 	Glaucoma and dementia screening.
Ongoing 	Recurrent URTIs – urine dip and MSU if signs of infection.
Create a Health Action Plan at the end of the annual review. Tis may be fairly simple such as changes to
diet/exercise, coming for blood tests or booking a dental review. It is a good idea to write this down for
the patient and some may even have a Health Action Plan booklet which you can write this in. Te RCGP
provides an example of the questionnaires and action plans that can be used, in its document A Step-by-Step
Guide for GP Practices: Annual Health Checks for People with a Learning Disability by Dr Matt Hoghton and
the RCGP Learning Disabilities Group.3
‘Ageing and the problems of old age are particularly relevant to people with Down syndrome as some of
these age-related problems develop earlier in life than would normally be the case.’1
‘Te astute GP will remember that the child with Down syndrome is susceptible to the same range of child-
hood problems as any other and that not all symptoms will be due to the syndrome.’2
➠ 392
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 2

-- 407 of 575 --

➠ 393
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Justin Walton 	17 years 	M
PMH 	Autistic spectrum disorder
Behavioural concerns 3 years ago
Lower respiratory tract infection
Medications 	None
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	Letter – discharged from CAMHS 2 months ago.
Investigations 	Nil
Household 	No household members registered

-- 408 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Autism and Transition Process
Open ☐ 	Tank you for phoning to speak to me today. Why did you see CAMHS? What did they say
was causing you to feel like that? Did they give you a name for the diagnosis?
Impact ☐ 	Everyone with autism can struggle with diferent things… what do you struggle with? What
is better now? Are you well at the moment? Is anything causing you worry? What does your
mum think?
Sense ☐ 	Do you worry about all the changes that are happening?
ICE ☐ 	What have you been thinking about recently? Are there any other thoughts that upset you?
Or make you feel angry? What do you do when you feel angry? What did you think we may
decide today? Is there anything else you were hoping for?
History ☐ 	Have you had any health problems? Any in your family? Do you take tablets? Drugs?
Alcohol? How do you spend your day? Do you do GCSEs? Very good. Were you pleased?
What would you like to do next? Who is at home? Are you in a relationship?
Empower ☐ 	Would you like to earn money? What are you good at? What do you enjoy? Can you think
of a job you could try? Would you like to live on your own? What do you do by yourself?
When might you be at risk? Does anyone say or do hurtful things to you? Who could you
tell if this happened? Yes, your family or your GP.
Flags ☐ 	When you feel angry do you have thoughts of hurting yourself or anyone else?
Curious ☐ 	Do you get on with your family? Do you feel life is harder for you than for your sister?
SummarICE ☐ It sounds as if you have had a difcult few years but there are things you are good at: you
have gained GCSEs and have, in your words, calmed down. But recent changes have been
stressful. Finishing school, being discharged from CAMHS and thinking about what your
mum said about fnding work and moving out has made you anxious. You have been spend-
ing more time alone. You would like to fnd a girlfriend and feel this would make you happy.
Impression ☐ You are going through a difcult time of change. You mentioned you have autism.
Experience ☐ What do you know about autism? What do you mean by not good at school?
Explanation ☐ Recent changes in your life have put all of the challenges of having autism together: having
to speak to new people, having to think about fnding work when you don’t fnd it easy
learning new skills and having to make changes in your life, like fnding work with the aim
of becoming independent.
Empathy ☐ 	Ofen people feel angry when they are hurt and upset. Your mum has encouraged you to
make changes and this is particularly difcult and worrying for you. I recognise you feel
upset and stressed. Have you spoken to your mum about this? I suspect she wants you to
have a fulflling life, and fnding work and your own place in the world can help with this.
Options ☐ 	Tere is an organisation called Restore for people like you who fnd adapting to work hard.
Tey help build your confdence with areas you are good at. You could tell them you prefer
not to work in groups and you are good with your hands. Would you be interested in this?
InCludE ☐ 	You mentioned a note for the job centre. I wonder: how about I give you a note for the next
month, in the short term, and meanwhile we work together to help to achieve your goals of
meeting someone and using your current skills in an environment where you are comfort-
able? I can print this of now and you could come and collect it from our receptionist. You
could speak to the Job Centre about your skills and hopes for the future to see what they
can suggest too.
Future ☐ 	Does this sound okay? You could also contact MIND who may point you in the direction
of small social events – you may be able to meet a girlfriend.
Specifcs ☐ 	Shall we talk again in a month? In the meantime, could you call Restore to see how they may
be able to help you?
Safety net ☐ 	Please phone a doctor if your anger increases or you are very upset.
➠ 394
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 3

-- 409 of 575 --

➠ 395	
Patient’s Story 	Autism and Transition Process
Doctor’s notes Justin Walton, 17 years. PMH: autistic spectrum disorder, behavioural concerns 3 years
ago and lower respiratory tract infection. Medication: none. Documents: discharged from
CAMHS 2 months ago.
How to act 	Nervous. Your mother told you to talk to the doctor alone. She is in the kitchen.
PC 	‘Te CAMHS team said I needed to start seeing you now.’
History 	Your mother made the appointment following instructions from CAMHS.
You are physically well and have no current illnesses. No signifcant family history.
‘I have autism. I have learning problems.’
You originally saw the CAMHS team 3 years ago because you were shouting a lot and you
were not getting on with your mum. You remember at the time feeling very frustrated that
you were struggling at school with friends and the work.
Your mood is okay. You have no thoughts of wanting to hurt yourself or others.
Social 	You now get on okay with your mum as you have ‘calmed down’, but you don’t get on well
with your father or younger sister. ‘She is good at everything.’ Tere is no violence or abuse
in the home or in your past. You lef school 2 months ago afer gaining three GCSEs in
Technology, IT and Geography. You did not make friends easily and became happy being
alone. If the doctor mentions a relationship, say you would like a girlfriend to make you
happy. You think you would prefer to live with a girlfriend. Tis is your main aim. You are
not sure where to fnd a girlfriend. You would like money but you don’t like being around
new people. However, you do feel you have skills – you are good at mending things. Tere
is an old scrapyard near your home and you enjoy restoring broken things. Your dad lets
you keep these in the garage. You think you could do a paper-round on your bike.
ICE 	You would like a note for the job centre. Your mum has said you can live there for 2 more
years but thinks you should start earning your own money and then fnd a place to live.
Tis has made you feel angry and is always on your mind. Since she said this, you stay in
your room. Te thought of going to work is making you feel very ‘angry’ (stressed) and you
think your family will force you out the house, but you struggle to verbalise how you are
feeling. You expect the doctor will give you a note. If the doctor makes other suggestions,
follow his or her advice if explained well and if the doctor is supportive. However, you push
for a note if he or she has not explored your skills or do not understand your situation. You
know that ‘Autism is where you are not good at school.’ If asked to expand, you mean ‘not
got lots of friends, not clever, don’t notice how people feel which can make them angry’.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 3

-- 410 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Transition Processes Model
‘Transitions occur throughout life… from childhood through puberty and adolescence to adulthood; from
immaturity to maturity and from dependence to independence… extra transitions as a result of other life events
for example, bereavement, separation of parents and being placed in care.’1
Complete CSA’s Transition Processes Model – grouped into the elements
below. First, a few tips…
1. You are not expected to include the whole model in 10–12 minutes! If, however, you spend time prac-
tising, you are more likely to be able to ask the appropriate questions in the exam that demonstrate your
ability to practise holistically.
2. Keep the questions in a logical order. Even better… signpost! ‘I’m interested to hear about changes
at school… now questions about what you can do for yourself ’… An excellent way to feel and appear
organised.
3. You can also signpost the elements you would like to discuss in a further consultation.
General health 	What is their perception of their current health? How could they improve their
health?
Health checks 	Dental checks, breast awareness, smears or testicular checks.
Physical health 	Any current issues? Any ongoing management required? Health awareness?
Mental health 	Do they sufer with anxiety, depression or any mental illness?
Life changes 	Have they had a change in environment: school, job or home? How did they cope?
Emotional adaptations 	How do they feel about the change: excited? scared? isolated?
Challenges 	What has been difcult or upsetting? Changes, stress or bereavements?
Strengths 	Have they developed skills and strengths? Are they proud of their achievements?
Achievements 	Finishing school, leaving home, fnding a job, getting married and parenting.
School changes 	Are they managing the workload? Future plans? How is the interaction with
friends?
Independence 	What do they do alone? What do they rely on others for?
Levels of responsibility 	What are they currently responsible for? How do they manage this? Current
stress?
Logistical challenges 	How do they manage money and legal obligations?
Relationships 	How are relationships with parents, siblings, friends, sexual partners?
Sexual health 	Experiences, contraception and infection prevention? Are they considering a
family?
Personal care 	Hygiene, managing periods, toileting and cooking?
Ethnic background 	Is their religion/background important to them at their current life stage?
‘Perception of risk’1 	Risk of abuse: what is their experience of risk? When are they most at risk?
How do they reduce risk? Risk of neglect? Is there vulnerability to exploitation?
Social setting: alcohol and drug use? Avoiding dangerous situations.
Needs 	What is causing them worry? What are their hopes? What do they need?
Transition services 	GPs have a role in providing additional support and bridging the transition
between child to adult social services (through a Connexions worker) and health
services.
Demonstrate you are being proactive by:
1. Understanding who is currently involved in the patient’s care.
2. Ofering to liaise with the current/new teams.
3. Providing follow-up and an ongoing point of contact.
➠ 396
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 3

-- 411 of 575 --

➠ 397
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Janine Paton 	33 years 	F
PMH 	Cerebral palsy
Severe learning disability
Constipation
Urinary tract infections
Epilepsy – no seizure for 2 years
Medications 	Laxido, sodium valproate and carbamazepine
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 412 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Mental Health and Intellectual
Disability
Open ☐ 	Hello Janine, I’m Dr Blount. It is a pleasure to meet you. Who have you brought with you
today? (looking to the carer). Can you tell me why you have come to see me today? Let’s
ask Ruth. Oh dear, what have you noticed? Anything else that has changed? Or changes
in behaviour? Or communication? I’m wondering what Janine is like when she is feeling
herself?
Curious ☐ 	Do you use any special ways of communicating?
History ☐ 	Janine, are you in pain? Does it hurt when you wee? Or in your tummy? Have you been for
a poo today? Ruth, have her bowels been normal? How ofen is Janine opening her bowels?
Have either of you noticed a change in going to the toilet? A smell or going more frequently?
Flags ☐ 	I’m wondering whether you have lost weight Janine? Ruth – how much, do you think? Over
how long? Has Janine had a temperature? May I see Janine alone for a moment? Janine – do
you like Ruth? Is anyone who lives or works at the home making you feel sad or upset?
Tank you. Let’s bring Ruth back into the room.
ICE ☐ 	Ruth, what do you think may be causing Janine to not feel herself? You have mentioned
pain; have you had any other thoughts? Is there anything you are worried may be going
on? What did you expect we may arrange or decide today?
Sense ☐ 	Janine, I am wondering if you are normally a quiet person like today or if you are normally
smiling and chatty. Ruth, what would you say? Janine, are you feeling happy or sad? Okay,
if I draw a picture of a smiling face and a sad face, can you tell me if you are this one… or
this one? I’m sorry you are feeling sad.
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise what we have said so far: Janine, your carers have been worried about you.
You have not had the same energy, you have stayed in your room and not been interested
in what you usually enjoy. You tell me you are not in pain but it is not clear what may be
wrong. You are feeling sad.
O/E ☐ 	Janine, may I listen to your chest, feel your tummy, take your blood pressure and tempera-
ture and have a look at your throat, ears and neck please? I will also test your wee. I would
like to weigh you please. Can we look at all your joints – arms and legs?
Impression ☐ 	I am not sure what is going on. It seems you are feeling sad at the moment. It could be that
there is a physical problem causing you to change or it could be a mental health problem
like depression. We will talk about how to help you feel happier, but I need to make sure
this is not because you are feeling unwell.
InCludE ☐ 	I agree we should do so some tests to fnd out what’s wrong.
Empathy ☐ 	It must be very hard, Janine, when you don’t feel yourself but we will try to fnd out why.
Options ☐ 	I would like to arrange a blood test. Janine, I will arrange for the teams specialising in seeing
patients who, like you, need more time, to perform eye and dental checks. Tis is to check
that it isn’t pain from your teeth, or problems with seeing clearly, that are making you feel
like this.
Empower ☐ 	Janine, you can help us in the meantime. Each day, can you tell Ruth or another carer if you
are this face or this face? Also, if Ruth points to diferent parts of your body can you clap
your hands if that part doesn’t feel okay? For example, if you had a headache and I pointed
to your head what would you do?
Future ☐ 	So we will arrange a few blood tests to look at your blood count, liver, kidney and thyroid,
and ask specialists to check your mouth and eyes. I will send your wee sample to the lab to
check for any infection.
Specifcs ☐ 	Shall we catch up again in 3–4 weeks to review the blood tests and see how you are? I will
also ask a nurse from the learning disability team to see you at home. Ruth, please let me
know if you do not receive an appointment in the next 4 weeks to see the specialists.
Safety net ☐ 	If any new symptoms develop or Janine seems worse, please let me know.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 4	
➠ 398

-- 413 of 575 --

➠ 399	
Patient’s Story 	Mental Health and Intellectual Disability
Doctor’s notes Janine Paton, 33 years. PMH: cerebral palsy, Severe LD, constipation, UTIs and epilepsy – no
seizure for 2 years. Medications: Laxido, sodium valproate and carbamazepine.
How to act 	Attends with carer, Ruth, who does all the talking. Janine looks at the foor unless spoken
to and only says yes/no to some questions and not all.
PC 	‘We are worried something is wrong. We don’t know if she is in pain.’
History 	She usually enjoys sitting in the lounge and watching television shows. Janine also likes it
when the music is on. However, over the past 2 months, she has not looked interested and
stays in her room. She seems ‘weaker’ because she has not got the same energy. She does
not cry but sometimes makes a wailing sound. You are not sure if this is because she is in
pain.
Her urine does not smell abnormal. She is not vomiting. She has required more encour-
agement to eat her food and she ofen leaves a lot of it. She has lost some weight over the
month. Janine is opening her bowels once daily with Laxido. No rectal bleeding.
Janine has regular periods, the last one being 2 weeks ago. Tey are not heavy.
Janine does not repeatedly touch her head or ears. She has not had a cough, cold or fever.
Janine does not walk and transfers with the help of two carers between the bed and
wheelchair.
Te carers have no information on Janine’s family.
Social 	Janine lives in a home with several other residents cared for by the staf.
ICE 	Ruth is worried it may be another water infection.
Ruth also wants to check that there is no abnormality in the stomach causing pain and loss
of appetite. Ruth expects she will be given more antibiotics but would like her to have a
scan.
Janine only says ‘no’ when asked about pain. Janine cannot answer about her mood.
However, if the doctor asks how best to communicate with Janine, she likes pictures and
can respond to pictures with yes or no. Pictures usually used include food, the weather and
faces. Janine also likes to clap as another way of saying yes.
O/E 	Janine has lost 4 kg in weight since she was last weighed 6 months ago.
HS normal, chest clear, abdomen sof, non-tender, no masses and there is no swelling in
any joint. Janine is moving all joints without pain. No lymphadenopathy. ENT normal.
Ruth has brought a sample of urine. Urine dipstick is negative.
Observations are normal.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 4

-- 414 of 575 --

➠ 400
Learning Points 	Mental Health and Intellectual Disability
‘In Valuing People (2001) they describe a “learning disability (LD)” as a: ‘signifcantly reduced ability to
understand new or complex information, to learn new skills, reduced ability to cope independently, which
starts before adulthood with lasting efects on development.’1
‘Understand the psychiatric disorders prevalent in the adult with intellectual disability and how their
diagnosis, detection and management difer…’2
Te patient may struggle to express or verbalise their emotions. Helpful questions to consider:
Has there been a change in behaviour?
Do they feel angry?
Are there any changes to their routine – sleep or eating?
Is there concern among family members?
Can a collateral history be obtained?
‘GPs should be able to recognise the following: atypical presentation of psychiatric or physical illness
because of sensory, communication and cognitive difculties.’2 Use language without jargon, seek a col-
lateral history; however, also screen for risk of neglect and this includes seeing the patient alone.
Use open screening questions for physical and mental health problems and social challenges. Have vigilance
and a high level of suspicion for atypical presentations of conditions.
Have a low threshold for suspicion of mental health problems and be proactive to enquire about subtle
changes and atypical presentations.
Other suggestions/tips to demonstrate the RCGP curriculum…
‘… community resources, e.g. residential facilities, daytime activities, support groups, advocacy, available
to this patient in my practice area, including those provided by the voluntary sector.’2 Demonstrate your
awareness of this by guiding where the patient can go to seek more information.
‘Tailored physical and mental state assessments in patients with intellectual disability and those unable to
verbalise symptoms.’2 Tailor the examination to the condition and life stage. A complete assessment should
also be performed in the annual health check.
Signpost that following your initial thorough examination, following investigation results you may consider
the help of the Learning Disability Team.
‘Additional important content… impact on family dynamics, including parenting experiences, bereave-
ment reactions (see also RCGP Topic Guide on People at the End of Life; physical, psychological and social
morbidity in carers.’2 Always ask about those who support or care for the patient. How are the relationships?
Ask about the carer’s health and concerns.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 4

-- 415 of 575 --

➠ 401
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Lilly Young 	24 years 	F
PMH 	Moderate learning disability
Constipation
Recurrent urinary tract infections
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No known drug allergies
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 416 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	COCP Request
Open ☐ 	Okay. Why would you like to go on the pill? Do you have a boyfriend? How do you know
Karl?
Sense ☐ 	It sounds like you are quite excited about this relationship. Would you like to have sex?
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about how to have sex? Do you know anything about infections you
can catch through sex? What do you know about the pill?
Curious ☐ 	Do you want to take the pill? What do you think about having a baby?
ICE ☐ 	Do you know any other ways to stop you from getting pregnant? Do you know how you
can avoid getting infections? Is there anything you are worried about? What would you like
to take away with you today? Would you remember to take a tablet every day?
History ☐ 	I see you used to have problems going to the toilet; can you tell me more about that? Are
you well now, or not? When was your last period? What are your periods like? Do you have
bad headaches? Do you take medicines? Has your mum or your grandparents ever had a
health problem? Do you have a dad? Who do you live with? Do you have a job? Do you
have a hobby? Who does Karl live with?
Flags ☐ 	Is Karl making you have sex? Does he ever hurt or upset you? Have you had sex?
Curious ☐ 	Have you talked to anyone about having sex? What does Julie say? Did she say anything
else? Would you like to ask me any questions? Do you get on well with your mum? Can
you talk to her about having sex? What does she say? Did she say anything else? Might you
have sex before your birthday?
O/E ☐ 	Lilly – can you tell me how much you weigh? Tank you. I will need to check your blood
pressure. Would that be okay? I would need to wrap something around your arm and it will
swell up like a balloon and feel tight for a minute – would that be okay? Could you come
to see me at 1 p.m. today? Please bring your mum or someone else with you if you would
like. Tank you.
Impression ☐ 	Lilly, you would like to have sex and you have decided not to have a baby yet.
SummarICE ☐ 	You don’t think you will remember a tablet. You don’t like having periods. You have decided
to talk to your mum again before you decide. You feel excited but Julie has said sex hurts
and this worries you.
Explanation ☐ You should only have sex if you want to. You can always say no. Sex should not hurt.
Safety net ☐ 	If it did hurt, you should tell Karl and tell a doctor too. Do you think you could do this?
Options ☐ 	Te pill is a tablet to stop you having a baby. If you don’t think you can remember it every
day, there are other options too – an injection every 3 months or a little stick under the arm
which is just one injection and lasts three years. What do you think? Okay, there is also a
special plaster that you can put on your arm. You leave it there for a week and change it
afer every week. What do you think to that idea? Do you think your mum would help you
with it? Te plaster has a medicine inside which goes into your skin. Tis medicine can
make some people very unwell; the risk is small but you would have to remember that if
ever your leg hurt or got bigger one day, or if you had a bad headache, you must let a doctor
know straight away. Tis can be a sign that something is wrong. Could you remember this?
Would you like to try this plaster? Te real name for the plaster is the patch. Do you have
any questions?
Empower ☐ 	Afer having sex, go to the toilet to have a wee. Tis stops those wee infections returning.
Have you heard of condoms, Lilly? Condoms are important to stop any bugs or infections
from Karl going to you. Tey also help prevent pregnancy too.
Empathy ☐ 	It is a lot to remember, so are you happy to talk it through with your mum frst? When you
come this afernoon, I will give you leafets about the pill, the patch and the implant so you
can talk about the choices with your mum.
Future ☐ 	Next time we can also talk about women’s check-ups.
Safety net ☐ 	Can you remember where in the body you may have pain if the patch is causing you harm?
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 5	
➠ 402

-- 417 of 575 --

➠ 403	
Patient’s Story 	COCP Request
Doctor’s notes Lilly Young, 24 years. PMH: moderate learning disability. Recurrent urinary tract infections.
Medications: none.
How to act 	You respond well if the doctor uses language which is easy to follow.
PC 	‘I would like the pill.’
History 	‘My mum told me I had to, otherwise I can’t go camping.’
You have known Karl, who is the same age as you, for many years.
You were in the same class at Rose Hill Special School. ‘Karl is like me.’
Karl asked you to the cinema a month ago. Now you see each other every evening.
Karl lives with his parents and younger sister. Tey are all family friends.
He wants to take you camping for your 25th birthday.
You’ve not had sex but would like to when you go camping (not before).
Karl says you will only have sex if you want to.
You are well. No contraindications to the pill. You have light periods 3/28.
No IMB.
‘I don’t like periods.’
‘Going for a poo and wee is okay now.’ You take no medicines.
Your mum has told you the doctor will want to know if there are any problems in the family
and there are none. If the doctor wants to know what your mum thinks, say your mum said
you will talk about what the doctor says at home. You forget this if the doctor does not ask.
Social 	You live with your mum. You do not know your dad. You have a friend, Julie.
You like going to the cinema and going out to eat pizza. You do not drink or smoke.
You work in the local garden centre cafe serving the tea and cofee.
ICE 	‘We talked about sex in class.’
You don’t know anything about the pill or any other contraception.
You are vaguely aware that you can become ill from having sex, i.e. STIs.
Your mum is happy for you to have sex; you have talked about it but promised her you
would take the pill. You hate having periods.
You don’t think you will remember a tablet every day.
You feel ‘scared but excited’. Julie has had sex and tells you sex hurts.
You don’t want any procedure or needles. You would like a baby. But your mum told you
not yet. Your mum said she would have to help you look afer a baby and she can’t do this
until she retires.
Examination 	BP 110/60. Weight 60 kg. BMI 23.2
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 5

-- 418 of 575 --

Learning Points 	COCP Request
Risk factors for safeguarding concerns:
Dependence on others: learning or physical disability.
Lack of family support/confdantes.
Social isolation.
At risk of neglect.
Partner dominance/unequal relationships.
Te impact of multiple negative events.
How do we pick up on risk?
Sensing: behavioural changes, low mood, annual reviews, MDT, awareness of DNAs or the opposite – mul-
tiple attendances. Building the relationship.
How to demonstrate the RCGP curriculum, which includes:
‘Additional important content… emotional and sexual needs of adults with intellectual disability and
how they may be expressed.’1
You can demonstrate this by respecting the patient’s request and providing education, an opportunity to ask
questions and choices. Do not make assumptions but check their understanding. Support them by ofering
safe options and helping the patient to consider diferent scenarios which may guide them to a decision
they feel comfortable with.
Te common pitfall with this consultation may be forgetting the routine medical checks, e.g. common con-
traindications, missed pill rules and safety netting advice. Do not avoid this conversation but instead adjust
the language to ensure how you deliver it is efective and allows the patient to reach an informed decision.
From the RCGP curriculum you need to think about service issues: ‘Health promotion including sexual
health, contraception, cardiovascular disease risks, cancer screening and smoking cessation.’1
Always remember to ‘Empower’ the patient and take every opportunity to provide health promotion
advice – in this case the UTI prevention, STI prevention and signposting the discussion about cervical
screening. Find out if your area has an Intellectual/Learning Disability team or specialist nurse you can ask
for advice. Tese teams/nurses should have awareness of local services available and may be able to help
with capacity assessments and challenging behaviour. Tey can ofen support patients and provide advice
to practices about improving access for those with ID. Sometimes they can also provide tips on encouraging
patients to attend for blood tests, etc.
➠ 404
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability – 5

-- 419 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Assessing Capacity
➠ 405
BMA’s Mental Capacity Toolkit
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for a useful link to the BMA’s Mental Capacity
Toolkit with series of very useful cards.
Information from the BMAs Mental Capacity Toolkit
Card 4 covers ‘assessing capacity’. In brief:
• 	As part of your assessment of whether or not an individual can consent to treatment or care, you may
need to assess whether or not they have capacity to make the decision or not.
• 	Tere are four aspects to consider and, if an individual fails any one of these, they are deemed not to
have capacity to make a decision:
• 	Understand information relevant to the decision.
• 	Retain the information relevant to the decision.
• 	Be able to weigh up or use the information.
• 	Be able to communicate their view – in any way/by any means.1
You need to listen, where appropriate, to relatives or friends who may be able to provide useful additional
information but must not be infuenced by the views of the third party regarding the decision.
If you decide that someone lacks capacity, this should be based on your ‘reasonable belief ’ and backed up
by objective reasons.
Te assessment of capacity relates to a specifc decision at a specifc time. If there is a change in the situation,
capacity should be reassessed.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual and Social Disability

-- 420 of 575 --



-- 421 of 575 --

CHAPTER 17 OVERVIEW
Neurology
➠ 407
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Neurology
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Peripheral
Neuropathy
‘Sensory and/or motor disturbances
(peripheral nerve problems) including
mono- and poly-neuropathies such as
nerve compression and palsies’
Causes, blood tests, red fags
2 	Normal Pressure
Hydrocephalus
‘Common and important
conditions – dementia… normal pressure
hydrocephalus’
‘Tests of cognition and interpretation in
relation to memory loss, dementia, delirium
and associated disease’
Symptom triad
Cause
Differential diagnosis
3 	Migraine 	‘Headaches including migraine’
‘The effect of… migraine on vision’
‘Treatments for migraine’
Red fags, differential diagnosis,
management options
4 	TIA 	‘Stroke including transient ischaemic
attacks’
FAST
Initial management of stroke and TIA
Secondary prevention
5 	Multiple
Sclerosis
‘Demyelination such as multiple sclerosis’ 	Epidemiology
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Blood tests

-- 422 of 575 --

CHAPTER 17 REFERENCES
Peripheral Neuropathy
1. 	https://patient.info/brain-nerves/peripheral-neuropathy-leafet#nav-2. Jul 2017.
Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus
1. 	https://patient.info/doctor/normal-pressure-hydrocephalus. Jan 2016.
Migraine
1. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/migraine/. May 2021.
2. 	http://patient.info/doctor/giant-cell-arteritis-pro. Nov 2016.
3. 	https://clinox.info/clinical-support/local-pathways-and-guidelines/Clinical%20Guidelines/Ox%20Migraine%20
Acute%20Terapy%20Guidelines%20Adult.pdf?UNLID=2551633772020617112816
4. 	https://clinox.info/clinical-support/local-pathways-and-guidelines/Clinical%20Guidelines/Migraine%20Adult%20
Prophylactic%20Terapy%20Guidelines.pdf?UNLID=2551633772020617113019
Useful Resource
https://patient.info/mental-health/cognitive-behavioural-therapy-cbt-leafet. Nov 2019.
TIA
1. 	NICE Guideline NG128. Stroke and transient ischaemic attack in over 16s: diagnosis and initial management. May
2019.
2. 	https://www.stroke.org.uk/what-is-stroke/what-are-the-symptoms-of-stroke
3. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/stroke-and-tia. Aug 2020.
4. 	Royal College of Physicians. National Clinical Guideline for Stroke. 5th edition. 2016.
5. 	Gent M., Beaumont D., Blanchard J. et al. A randomised, blinded, trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at
risk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE). CAPRIE Steering Committee. Lancet 1996; 348(9038):1329–39.
6. 	Rothwell P.M., Algra A., Chen Z. et al. Efects of aspirin on risk and severity of early recurrent stroke afer transient
ischaemic attack and ischaemic stroke: time-course analysis of randomised trials. Lancet 2016; 388: 365–75.
7. 	https://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/pat108.pdf. Leafet for patients following stroke.
Multiple Sclerosis
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/multiple-sclerosis-pro. Mar 2020.
2. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/multiple-sclerosis/. Aug 2020.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 408
Neurology

-- 423 of 575 --

➠ 409
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Maggie Freestone 	72 years 	F
PMH 	Bereavement. Death of husband 2 years ago.
2 × NVD
Gastritis
Miscarriage
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 424 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Peripheral Neuropathy
Open ☐ 	Tell me about this problem from the beginning. Ten what did you notice? Anything else that
isn’t right?
Curious ☐ 	When you say you don’t trust your feet, what do you mean? Have you fallen?
Sense ☐ 	I can see you are a positive person but I’m worried how this is afecting you.
Impact ☐ 	Has this changed how you live or your behaviour? Or your mood?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think has caused this? What has been on your mind? Is there anything you are
worried about? What did you think or hope we may do today?
History ☐ 	Any other symptoms? Are you otherwise well? Any other medical conditions yourself or which
run in the family? I’m sorry that I am not aware, but what caused your husband’s death? How are
you getting on without him? Who else is in your life? Do you take any medicines? Did anyone
in your family have a similar problem?
Risk ☐ 	Do you drink alcohol? Have you been unwell recently or had a cold or sore throat?
Flags ☐ 	Is it painful? What does it feel like? How are you on the stairs or rising from a chair? Any weight
loss? Any change in your bowels or change in control of going to the toilet? Any episodes of
sweating? Or weakness? Have you felt lightheaded on standing? Do you still feel hot and cold
where the numbness is? Any dry mouth or problems with the skin or joints?
O/E ☐ 	May I examine you; check the sensation and strength in your arms and legs, check your refexes
and watch you walk then check the spine for tenderness and movement please? I’d just like to
look at the muscles in the legs now. Can I check your weight, pulse and blood pressure? Now I’d
like to feel the pulses in your feet. May I feel your abdomen and the lymph glands in your neck,
under the arms and groin? Lastly can I ask you to go to the toilet for a urine sample please?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise what you have told me, your feet have been gradually becoming more numb over
the last year. Tis has stopped you cycling and you have fallen. You have been concerned about
what may have caused this and so has your son. You sometimes have pain in your feet too. You
weren’t sure what I’d say today. Have I understood?
Empathy ☐ 	I imagine it knocks your confdence when you can’t trust your feet, especially afer a fall.
Impression ☐ 	I think you have peripheral neuropathy.
Experience ☐ 	Have you known anyone who has had a similar problem?
Explanation ☐ 	Peripheral means the parts of us furthest from the heart, and neuropathy means a problem with
the nerve. Unfortunately, though, this is only a description of the problem rather than telling
us the cause. Tere are several things that might cause it but no clues so far from what you have
told me.
InCludE ☐ 	You told me you’ve been lying awake worrying about this and it’s important we help you to sleep
better by fnding out what’s wrong.
Recommend ☐ I’d like to start by doing a blood test for your routine health including for anaemia, your kidneys
and liver, blood tests for infammation, also check your cholesterol, your sugar level and vitamins
called B12 and folate which, when low, can cause this. I would also like to check your urine for
protein and sugar. Could I ask our falls team to see you, to help rebuild your confdence?
Options ☐ 	We can try diferent pain relief – would you like to hear about the options?
Empower ☐ 	Have you any thoughts about what may give you more confdence on your feet? Perhaps some-
thing to give you some support when walking?
Specifcs ☐ 	Afer we’ve fnished today, please tell reception that you need two appointments – one for a blood
test as soon as convenient and then another to see me a week later.
Future ☐ 	When we meet up again afer the blood tests, I should have more information and it is likely that
I will, at that point, ask the neurologists – the nerve specialists – to see you. I expect they may talk
to you about nerve conduction studies – a test which looks at the electricity fow in your nerves.
Safety net ☐ 	If ever you notice any weakness or new symptoms, or if you fall, please contact a doctor straight
away as you would need to be examined again. I don’t expect this to happen but if you ever notice
a change in the control of your bladder or bowel or a new back pain or difculty breathing, please
let a doctor know straight away so we can make sure it is nothing serious.
➠ 410
Neurology – 1

-- 425 of 575 --

➠ 411	
Patient’s Story 	Peripheral Neuropathy
Doctor’s notes Maggie Freestone, 72 years. PMH: bereavement. Death of husband 2 years ago. 2 × NVD.
Miscarriage. Gastritis. Medication: none.
How to act 	Chirpy and chatty.
PC 	‘Hello Doctor. Well, it’s my feet. Ofen, I can’t feel them. Very strange. What do you think
it is then?’
History 	You have always been very healthy. About a year ago you started to notice your lef foot
felt a bit odd at times and then the right started about 6 months ago. Now both feet don’t
really feel normal most of the time. You therefore watch your feet as you walk. You have
no symptoms of diabetes. You drink no alcohol. You have never smoked. You take no
medicines. Your memory is good. You have had no head injury. You have no back pain or
bladder/bowel dysfunction. Your strength is good apart from when you can’t feel what you
are doing. You have no problems in the proximal muscles. You wouldn’t describe it as pins
and needles but ‘peculiar … like my feet have become sponge’. You can still feel warm water.
You have no other symptoms. No FH.
Social 	You miss Des but you get on with life and love seeing people. Des died of prostate cancer
which had spread to his bones and caused his kidneys to fail. You remain very active for
the church, ofen raising money. You are very proud of how good you are for your age. You
enjoyed riding your bike until last year when it became a problem.
‘Now, I don’t trust my feet.’ Say this with laugh.
You live on your own.
ICE 	You try to laugh this of; however, you have been lying awake wondering what this is. But
you like to stay positive and you shrug it of when your children mention it. Your son is
worried since you fell and banged your shoulder. Te shoulder recovered but it did knock
your confdence. Only if the doctor specifcally asks you, you mention the burning pain the
problem causes but you do not want any medicine for this. Your son bought you a mobile
phone just in case you ever fall.
Examination 	Tere is decreased sensation in both feet to just above the ankle. Arms are normal. Te
power in the legs is normal until L5/S1 which is 4/5 strength. Refexes absent. Plantars
downgoing. No muscle wasting. Tere is no spinal tenderness. BMI 25. BP 130/60. HR 62
bpm regular. Normal ROM spine and straight leg raise. Sensory ataxic (‘stomping’) gait.
Abdomen normal, no masses and no lymphadenopathy. Normal urine dipstick. Normal
peripheral pulses.
Neurology – 1

-- 426 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Peripheral Neuropathy1
As well as sensory and motor symptoms, ask about features of autonomic dysfunction, which may include
a change to the bowels, sweating, sphincter disturbance and postural hypotension.
Prevalence 	About 1 in 50 people have some form of peripheral neuropathy.1
Causes 	Diabetes or diabetic amyotrophy (most common cause in Europe)
Alcohol
B12/folate defciency
Chronic kidney disease
HIV
Shingles
Rheumatoid arthritis
Lyme disease
Sjögren’s syndrome
Amyloidosis
Uraemia
Guillain–Barré syndrome/chronic infammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP)
Porphyria
Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease
Malignancy or paraneoplastic syndrome
Vasculitic neuropathy
Side efects of chemotherapy including drugs used to treat HIV and more.
Remember Complete CSA’s motto: Common things are common… but what mustn’t I miss?
Ensure you are aware of how the rare conditions above may present.
Blood tests 	FBC, U&E, LFT, GGT, TFTs, CRP, ESR, ANA, B12, folate, serum and urine electrophoresis.
Urine dipstick for protein and glucose.
CXR – sarcoidosis, malignancy.
Consider – Lyme or HIV serology, urinary porphyrins and an autoimmune screen.
Red fags 	Always look out for cauda equina syndrome.
Gait
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for a link to a helpful guide on the assessment of
different gaits.
➠ 412
Neurology – 1

-- 427 of 575 --

➠ 413
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Lionel Moore 	84 years 	M
PMH 	TIA 3 years ago
Atrial fbrillation
Hypertension
Medications 	Warfarin
Atorvastatin 40 mg ON
Indapamide 2.5 mg OM
Ramipril 5 mg OM
Bisoprolol 5 mg OM
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	BP 130/70 1 month ago
Household 	Sandra Moore 	79 years 	F

-- 428 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus
Open ☐ 	Tell me, when did either of you frst notice something wasn’t right? What symptoms followed?
Has anything else changed with your health?
History ☐ 	I am interested to hear your story, Lionel. Sandra, feel free to add anything. Lionel, how do you
feel? In what way ‘not right’? Have you felt like this before? What happened when you had the
TIA? Your tablets, please talk me through when you take each one. Let’s now go through the
diferent parts of the body. Any headaches? How did it start? Any nausea or vomiting? Any
changes in the arms or legs? Any problems with your speech or swallowing? Eyesight problems?
Any breathing difculties or chest problems? Pain in the tummy? Have you had a temperature?
Any back pain? Any changes passing urine? Can you tell me about the accidents?
Curious ☐ 	What do you mean by wobbly exactly?
Risk ☐ 	Has your INR been in the normal range? Have you fallen or banged your head?
Flags ☐ 	Have you lost weight over recent months? Have you had any change in behaviour?
Sense ☐ 	Lionel, you keep looking at Sandra, is that because you are struggling to tell me?
Impact ☐ 	How has your memory afected you day to day, Lionel? Sandra, in what way have Lionel’s memory
troubles been difcult for you?
ICE ☐ 	Lionel, what did you think may be causing your symptoms? Is there anything you are particularly
worried about? What did you think I may suggest today? How about you, Sandra – what have
you been wondering? Did you hope I would do anything particular today?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, the unsteadiness came frst 9 months ago and for 6 months your memory has
been patchy. Sandra, you have been worried about what this may mean for the future; however,
with recent urinary incontinence you both wondered if you have a water infection and thought
we needed to prescribe antibiotics for this.
O/E ☐ 	I would like to take a good look at you: listen to your heart, take your BP, pulse, temperature,
check the nerves to your face, arms and legs, and look at the back of your eyes. Now please stand
up and walk across the room, turn around and return. Can you move your neck up and down?
Now, lying down, please lif your head and now raise your legs. May I check on the edge of the
back passage to see if the nerve supply is normal? Could you provide a urine sample?
InCludE ☐ 	I see why you worried about a urine infection and dementia but, with the additional symptom
of feeling wobbly, I think it may be something else.
Impression ☐ 	I believe it is possible that the diagnosis may be normal pressure hydrocephalus. If I’m right,
prompt treatment should quickly improve your symptoms, especially your walking.
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across the term hydrocephalus?
Explanation ☐ 	‘Hydro’ means water and ‘cephalus’ refers to the brain. Fluid surrounding the brain is contin-
uously made then reabsorbed. If the reabsorption stops, this leads to less fuid being produced
but overall, the pressure increases. Usually three things happen: a change in mobility, followed
by memory trouble then urine incontinence. Te treatment involves redirecting the fuid so that
it moves away from the brain to reduce the pressure. Sometimes there is no cause found, but a
previous bleed in the brain is possible. Your age and drinking alcohol put you at risk of a bleed,
but your headache symptoms are not typical.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate this must have come as a shock when you were expecting just antibiotics.
Options ☐ 	I think we need to ask the hospital doctors to see you today. I expect they will arrange a head
scan and may insert a needle into your back to check the fuid pressure. I think this problem
has been building for many months rather than a sudden change like a stroke. Sandra, do you
feel comfortable driving Lionel to the hospital? I will call the specialist.
Specifcs ☐ 	Lionel, when you are back home, please message reception to let me know and also book an
appointment to see me.
Future ☐ 	We can then reassess your memory and walking to see if there are any ongoing concerns and
check your general health.
Empower ☐ 	We could also discuss the link between alcohol and risks to the brain and talk about practical
steps you could take to protect your brain health.
Safety net ☐ 	I don’t expect problems en route but if any problems arise, stop and call 999.
➠ 414
Neurology – 2

-- 429 of 575 --

➠ 415	
Patient’s Story 	Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus
Doctor’s notes Lionel Moore, 84 years. PMH: TIA 3 years ago, atrial fibrillation and hypertension.
Medications: warfarin, atorvastatin 40 mg ON, indapamide 2.5 mg OM, ramipril 5 mg OM
and bisoprolol 5 mg OM. BP 130/70 1 month ago.
You attend with your wife, Sandra, today.
How to act 	You are quiet and ofen turn to Sandra to answer for you.
PC 	Your wife Sandra is with you; she speaks frst.
‘Lionel has been incontinent the past few days.’
History 	Sandra 	You have found that he is damp and feel guilty that you shouted at him for wet-
ting on the sofa. Tere has been no faecal incontinence. When the incontinence
happened a third time you thought you had better see the doctor.
‘Lionel’s memory hasn’t been too good.’ For example, he can’t remember if he has
had dinner and repeatedly asks if the dog has been fed. He has not wandered and
there have been no safety concerns.
‘Over the last week he is not quite right.’
Lionel had a TIA. His INR levels have been good and were last checked 1 week
ago.
Tere have been no further neurological signs unlike last time when, for 8 hours,
his lef side was weak. He has been ‘a bit wobbly’. You remember this started 9
months ago.
Lionel 	You feel ‘not myself ’. By this you mean you feel muddled. Your vision is normal.
No abdominal pain or dysuria. You can’t remember any increased urinary
frequency.
No prostate symptoms. You have no back pain. You have lost no weight.
You have no cardiac or respiratory symptoms. Your bowels are normal.
You have not fallen or had a head injury. You have a ‘bit of a headache’ of gradual
onset and no vomiting or nausea.
Social 	Lionel enjoys two glasses of whisky every night. He stopped attending the pub quiz 6 months
ago, as it started to become embarrassing that Lionel’s memory was fading. Lionel used to
be a solicitor and has three children, grandchildren and now great-grandchildren.
Lionel smoked until he was 38 years old.
ICE 	Neither of you are worried that this may be another TIA as Lionel has had no weakness.
You suspect a UTI. You expect antibiotics.
Sandra 	Worried if he has the ‘big D’. You have been very worried how this will progress.
Examination 	BP 128/72. HR 68 bpm irregularly irregular. RR 14. Sats 97%. Temperature 36.6 °C.
Urine dipstick leucocytes only. HS normal. Abdomen sof, non-tender.
Normal neurology apart from refexes which are brisk bilaterally. CN normal examination.
Unsteady gait. No other cerebellar signs. Fundi are normal. Brudzinski/Kernig’s negative.
No neck stifness.
Normal anal tone and sensation.
Neurology – 2

-- 430 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus
Signifcance 	A potentially reversible cause of dementia, possibly accounting for up to 6% of
all dementias.1
Triad 	Apraxia, progressive memory disturbance and sphincter disturbance/
incontinence.
Cause 	Idiopathic meningitis, subdural haematoma, head injury and radiotherapy.
Differential diagnosis in this case: all are possible and the scan will help differentiate.
Subdural haematoma 	Secondary to age and alcohol.
TIA/cerebellar stroke 	Secondary to risk factors but history and examination not typical.
Dementia, postural hypotension and UTI
All common. Te symptoms and dipstick do not support a UTI.
With the above triad, normal pressure hydrocephalus needs to be excluded.
Metastases 	However, there was no reported weight loss or vomiting.
Cauda equina syndrome However, no back pain or associated red fags.
➠ 416
Neurology – 2

-- 431 of 575 --

➠ 417
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Yasmin Small 	23 years 	F
PMH 	Migraines
Medications 	Amitriptyline 25 mg ON
Desogestrel 75 μg OD
Sumatriptan 50 mg PRN. Max 2 daily.
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	3 months ago. Migraines occurring twice a week. Commenced
amitriptyline. No abnormal bleeding with desogestrel.
Investigations: No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 432 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Migraine
Open ☐ 	Tell me more about your headaches please. Any other symptoms you’ve noticed? Can you talk
me through a typical headache episode? Tank you.
History ☐ 	Is there one type of headache? A pattern or relation to periods? How ofen are they occurring?
What time of day do they start? Do they wake you? Where on the head? What does it feel like?
Severity from 1 to 10? What makes it worse? Or better? Does lying down help? Any medical
problems? Sinus trouble or increased headache learning forward? What medicines are you taking
at the moment? Do they help? Any changes in your life that may have triggered them? Are work
and home okay? Any stress?
Sense ☐ 	You sound tense; are you in pain now?
Impact ☐ 	How does it feel living with all these headaches? Please tell me more about your anxiety.
Curious ☐ 	What does your mum think? Why did you decide to talk to me on this particular day?
ICE ☐ 	Have you read about anything that can help?
Flags ☐ 	Any visual disturbance? Do the arms or legs feel diferent or weak? Any weight loss? Nausea?
Vomiting? Are you ever confused or unusually sleepy? Has anyone said your behaviour has
changed? Do you now struggle with anything you could easily do a few months ago? Any fevers?
Does the light bother you? Any neck stifness? Any head injury?
Risk ☐ 	Any FH? Do you have much alcohol, cafeine, cheese, chocolate or citrus fruits? How is your
sleep? Do you have much screen time? Do you drink plenty of water?
SummarICE ☐ 	Your headaches afect your life and this is frustrating. You sufer with anxiety and worry about
a serious cause like a brain tumour and would like specialist advice. Sumatriptan helps but you
want to prevent their onset. Your friend suggested topiramate. Anything else I’ve missed?
O/E ☐ 	It would be helpful to arrange an examination, where I check your HR, BP and your eyes, arms
and legs? Would it be possible to come to see me today at 2 p.m.? Great.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate why you want to check that this frequent headache is nothing serious.
Impression ☐ 	I agree with you and the previous GP who diagnosed that these headaches are migraines.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about migraines? Do you know anything that can trigger them?
Explanation ☐ 	A one-sided headache which takes you to bed is typical of a migraine. Te cause of the migraine
is not completely known but theories include chemical and blood vessel changes.
InCludE ☐ 	It sounds like you thought seeing a specialist may be helpful for two reasons: to ensure there is
no tumour and fnd the cause. I don’t expect to fnd anything concerning when I examine you
and I am reassured that you have no symptoms of a brain tumour. Te headaches do not occur
when the pressure is at its highest in the morning, you don’t feel sick and have not vomited. Your
nerves appear to be working normally.
Recommend ☐ You mentioned feeling groggy on amitriptyline. Your friend’s right, topiramate is an option but
we’d need to change your contraception as it can cause serious problems in pregnancy. I think
a tablet called propranolol may be useful as it helps with migraine and anxiety. Potential side
efects can include tiredness. However, many feel fne on it and we could start at a low dose. What
are your thoughts? Okay I’ll check your BP and HR at 2 p.m. before starting it. May I check,
have you ever had asthma or used inhalers? I would suggest we start with a 40 mg tablet daily
to make sure there are no side efects and afer a week increase to 40 mg twice daily. Regarding
your amitriptyline – let’s wean your body of this by prescribing a 10 mg tablet at night for a
month. Meanwhile could you keep a headache diary? Te features/timing and any triggers for
the headache would be very helpful.
Empower ☐ 	Could you try to avoid cafeine, citrus, chocolate and alcohol? Be prepared for rebound head-
aches initially. Also, general lifestyle measures – including regular healthy meals, a good sleep
pattern and exercise – can all help. Next time we could discuss other ways to help your anxiety
and later I’ll give you a leafet about anxiety and a therapy called CBT.
Safety net ☐ 	If at any time you start vomiting, feel unwell, have any new symptoms or the headaches wake
you or change, see a GP as we would have to reassess your migraine diagnosis.
Specifcs ☐ 	Okay have a think about what I’ve suggested and I’ll see you at 2 p.m. to examine you and provide
you with prescriptions.
➠ 418
Neurology – 3

-- 433 of 575 --

➠ 419	
Patient’s Story 	Migraine
Doctor’s notes Yasmin Small, 23 years. PMH: migraines. Medications: amitriptyline 25 mg ON. Desogestrel
75 μg daily. Sumatriptan 50 mg PRN.
How to act 	Currently in discomfort. Keep touching your head if face to face.
PC 	‘I keep getting these headaches.’
History 	You have sufered with migraines for years but they started becoming more frequent 4
months ago. You can’t think of any triggers. Now they occur at least twice a week. It is always
the same headache. Lef side or frontal. Onset usually mid-afernoon. It develops over an
hour and reaches 8/10 severity. Apart from occasional nausea, only during the headache,
you have no associated symptoms.
You have not been under pressure; you are not stressed or depressed.
Te headaches are not related to your periods.
You have no medical history and take no medicines. Your mum had migraines.
You don’t take any other pain relief.
When the headache comes on you lie down in a dark room and sumatriptan helps.
Social 	You work in a clothes shop which you enjoy. You live with your boyfriend of 2 years.
You drink a couple of glasses of wine weekly. You do not smoke.
At work you take it in turns to buy each other a cofee and chocolate.
You have had to have time of work. Your healthy anxiety has also been running wild with
the headaches happening so frequently. Te anxiety stops you from focusing on tasks.
ICE 	‘Well, I suppose you always worry you may have a brain tumour, don’t you?’
You saw a programme 3 nights ago about a girl who had a brain tumour.
Your friend told you that you should be on topiramate.
You would like to see a specialist, your reason being that the headaches keep coming back
and you want to know what is wrong.
You don’t really know anything about migraines other than they are bad headaches.
Examination 	BP 110/60, Fundi normal. Visual acuity 6/6. Normal neurological examination.
Neurology – 3

-- 434 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Migraine1
Please use your own judgement and refer to the full NICE guidance and BNF for further advice.
Red fags 	Neurological or raised intracranial pressure symptoms or seizures.
Changes in behaviour, memory or skills.
Unilateral deafness or pulse synchronous tinnitus.
Drowsiness or loss of consciousness.
Ataxia.
Sudden visual loss.
Migraine with aura using OCP.
Diagnosis 	See NICE guidelines for full details. Can diagnose migraine without aura if there are at least
fve attacks that fulfl criteria (duration, characteristics, associated symptoms, photophobia/
phonophobia, no other explanation). Diagnose migraine with aura with at least two attacks
that fulfl criteria (typical fully reversible symptoms, characteristic features of aura, no other
explanation for headache).
Differential diagnosis
Tension headache.
Trigeminal autonomic cephalgias, e.g. cluster headache.
Primary cough headache and cold-stimulus (‘ice-cream’) headache.
Secondary headache, e.g. from trauma to head or neck.
Subarachnoid haemorrhage: ‘thunder-clap headache’ – severe, sudden onset.
Subdural haemorrhage: risk factors include alcohol, being elderly and falls.
Temporal arteritis: >50 years + pain on chewing or combing your hair? Temporal artery:
‘absent pulse, beaded, tender or enlarged’.2
Exposure to, or withdrawal from, substances: carbon monoxide, cocaine, alcohol. Also
medication overuse headache.
Infections, e.g. ear, sinuses, meningitis, encephalitis, cerebral abscess.
Hypoxia/hypertension – including pre-eclampsia and eclampsia.
Head/neck problems such as angle closure glaucoma or temporomandibular joint
dysfunction.
Tere are many more – see guidance for the full list.
Migraine management options to consider3
Medication options 	Ibuprofen.
Aspirin.
Metoclopramide or prochlorperazine. Migraines cause gastric stasis so patients are
likely to beneft from prokinetic treatment (with acute therapy) to assist absorp-
tion and decrease nausea. Tere is a risk of extrapyramidal side efects.
Triptans 	Avoid if uncontrolled HTN and vascular disease.
Check licensing: >60 years and children.
Migraine prophylaxis 	Propranolol. Amitriptyline or topiramate.4
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for links to a very useful one-page Summary of:
Migraine – Acute Therapy Guideline
Migraine – Prophylactic Therapy Guideline
➠ 420
Neurology – 3

-- 435 of 575 --

➠ 421
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Ahmed Hidad 	58 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Hypercholesterolaemia
Medications 	Indapamide 2.5 mg
Atorvastatin 40 mg
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	BP 3 months ago 132/80
Blood tests 1 year ago HbA1c 5.8% (40 mmol/mol)
Lipids – normal range
Household 	No household members registered

-- 436 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	TIA
Open ☐ 	Tell me the story of what happened. How are you now? How is your health generally? Did
you notice any other symptoms? How long did it last? What do the arm and leg feel like
today? How do you feel today? Are you still afected in any way?
Flags ☐ 	Did the lef side feel weak? Did you notice any changes in your vision or speech? Did you feel
lightheaded, the heart racing or in pain at the time? Headache or vomiting? Has anything
like this happened before?
Sense ☐ 	I see you are worried. It sounds like you were hesitant about calling for help.
Curious ☐ 	Why did you not call for help? What was going through your mind?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think the problem was? Is there anything else that you have been concerned
about? What did you think I may suggest today?
History ☐ 	Talk me through when you take your medicines. Who is important to you in your life?
Since your wife died, how are you doing on your own? Do you drink any alcohol?
Risk ☐ 	Has anyone in your family had a heart attack or stroke? Have you ever smoked? Do you
have any pain in the chest or legs when walking? Have you had a fall or hit your head? Have
you ever had a stomach ulcer?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you are usually well. You are worried that you have had a stroke as last
night the lef side felt weak, you lay in bed for hours uncertain whether to call for help but
what stopped you is the fear that the ambulance crew would take you to hospital, which is
a frightening thought.
Empathy ☐ 	You are a man who likes peace and quiet. It sounds as if you would have liked some support,
but didn’t feel there was a good option – your daughter was 2 hours away, is that correct?
O/E ☐ 	May I feel your pulse, listen to the heart and neck vessels, take your blood pressure, check
the nerves in the face, arms and legs please. Please may I see you walk across the room?
InCludE ☐ 	You wondered if this was a stroke like your neighbour had and that it might leave you lasting
problems. Tankfully I don’t think that’s the case.
Impression ☐ 	It sounds as if you had a mini-stroke called a TIA: transient ischaemic attack. Transient
means short-lived and ischaemic means a lack of blood supply, in this case to the brain.
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across any of these terms before?
Explanation ☐ Several factors increase the risk of having a stroke or mini-stroke. In your case it includes
the high cholesterol and high blood pressure.
Recommend ☐ I would like to refer you to the hospital where you will be seen as an outpatient within 24
hours. Would that be okay?
Specifcs☐ 	Please let me know if you are not seen within 24 hours. I would also like to give you some
aspirin to take until you have seen the specialist: 300 mg right away and then 75 mg daily.
Let’s get a heart tracing and some blood tests to help the specialist; could you book in for
these at reception?
Empower ☐ 	Tere are things you can do whilst waiting to be seen such as ensuring you remember to
take all your medication regularly, including the aspirin.
Future ☐ 	At the hospital they will examine you and then discuss further tests such as a special brain
scan or a jelly scan of your neck arteries. When you have been seen by the hospital doctor,
please return so we can discuss your general health and update your medicines.
Safety net ☐ 	Tere is risk this may happen again. I’m pleased that your symptoms went away which is
why we call it a mini-stroke, but a TIA can be a warning of a larger stroke and you could
be lef paralysed like your neighbour. Tis would greatly afect your life around the home
and in the garden.
Specifcs ☐ 	Terefore, if this happens again, I would like you to call 999 straight away. Te beneft of this
is that they could give you treatment to help the blood supply to the brain and prevent some
damage to the brain. Do you think you will call 999 if it happens again? Because of the risk
of another episode like this, you must not drive until you have been told it is safe to do so.
Neurology – 4	
➠ 422

-- 437 of 575 --

➠ 423	
Patient’s Story 	TIA
Doctor’s notes Ahmed Hidad, 58 years. PMH: hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia. Medications:
indapamide 2.5 mg and atorvastatin 40 mg.
How to act 	Pleasant and respectful.
PC 	‘Last night I couldn’t use my arm and my leg felt weak.’
History 	You have always been well. You attend the doctors yearly for your blood pressure and
cholesterol check. Last night you were sweeping the garage and your lef arm dropped the
brush. It felt as if it had gone limp and your lef leg also felt strange and possibly weak. You
went to sit down in the kitchen and weren’t sure whether to call your daughter but it went
away afer 10 minutes. You lay awake for many hours unsure what to do but relieved it had
gone away. Eventually you fell asleep. No symptoms this morning.
You have never had anything like this before.
You ofen forget to take your cholesterol medicine at night but you remember the blood
pressure medicine with breakfast.
Your vision was normal and you didn’t speak to anyone. You didn’t feel muddled in any way.
You have not had a fall or head injury. You didn’t call an ambulance as you thought they
would send you to hospital and you have always preferred being alone and hate the thought
of hospitals.
Social 	You lost your wife to leukaemia 10 years ago.
Your daughter lives 2 hours away so you didn’t want to worry her.
You used to be a gardener and still enjoy looking afer your large garden for when the family
is around. Your son lives abroad but tries to see you with his family every few months.
You are independent with your ADL. You have never smoked and do not drink alcohol.
ICE 	You are worried that you may have had a stroke.
You expect the doctor may give you aspirin.
Your neighbour had a stroke many years ago. He needed to be in a wheelchair aferwards.
You follow all of the doctor’s advice.
Examination 	Normal examination of the arms, legs and cranial nerves. BP 132/88. HR 72 bpm regular.
No carotid bruit. Normal gait.
Neurology – 4

-- 438 of 575 --

Learning Points 	TIA
Prompt recognition of symptoms of stroke and TIA
Outside hospital, use a validated tool (e.g. FAST) to screen for TIA or stroke in people with neurological symptoms
that have come on suddenly:1
• 	Face – Can the person smile? Has their face fallen on one side?
• 	Arms – Can the person raise both arms and keep them up?
• 	Speech – Slurred speech? Can the person speak clearly and understand what you are saying?
• 	Time – If ANY of these three signs, phone 999.2
Initial management of suspected TIA3
• 	Aspirin 300 mg immediately (with PPI if appropriate), unless contraindicated (e.g. already taking, or known
bleeding problem).
• 	If the suspected TIA occurred within last 7 days, refer people to be seen for specialist assessment and inves-
tigation within 24 hours.1
• 	Admit to hospital if patient is taking anticoagulant or has bleeding disorder.
Initial management of suspected stroke3
• 	999 ambulance.
• 	Tell ambulance control and the hospital that you suspect a stroke.
• 	Do not give aspirin until possibility of haemorrhagic stroke excluded.
• 	While waiting for an ambulance, monitor ABC and give O2 if SATS <95% and no contraindication.
Secondary prevention
• 	Control of blood pressure. Reduce BP gradually aiming for systolic <130, unless severe bilateral carotid
stenosis.3
• 	Antiplatelet agents – see below.
• 	Atorvastatin 20–80 mg.3,4
• 	Diet and lifestyle advice (smoking, alcohol, daily exercise, good diet, etc).
Afer the CAPRIE trial5 which recommends clopidogrel following atherosclerotic vascular disease, the 2016 Royal
College of Physicians guidelines suggest that ‘patients with a non-disabling stroke should receive treatment for
secondary prevention as soon as the diagnosis is confrmed’ – including clopidogrel (300 mg loading dose then
75 mg daily).4
A study published in Te Lancet (May 2016), ‘Efects of aspirin on risk and severity of early recurrent stroke
afer transient ischaemic attack and ischaemic stroke: time-course analysis of randomised trials’, suggests that
the beneft of aspirin given as soon as possible afer TIA has been underestimated in terms of preventing further
stroke or severity of further stroke.6
Primary care management after discharge following stroke or TIA3
Consider:
• 	Optimise management of risk factors such as:
• 	Diabetes
• 	OSA
• 	Contraception – no COC for patients who have had stroke or TIA
• 	Annual fu immunisation
• 	Driving. Patient must notify DVLA. See DVLA ‘Assessing standards for ftness to drive’.
• 	Work – can the person return to work? Will rehabilitation be needed?
• 	Job centre can arrange for referral to specialist in employment for people with a disability or to specialist
vocational rehab, team.
TIA booklet for patients
Available at https://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/pat108.pdf7
Neurology – 4	
➠ 424

-- 439 of 575 --

➠ 425
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Lydia Cooper 	25 years 	F
PMH 	Tonsillitis – 3 years ago
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 440 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Multiple Sclerosis
Open ☐ 	Tell me what you’ve noticed from the beginning. Anything else that is unusual? How do
you feel?
Impact ☐ 	Have your symptoms stopped you from doing anything?
History ☐ 	Are you well usually? Have you had any recent illnesses or viral symptoms? Tell me more
about you? Who are you close to? Do you work? What do you like to do – do you have
hobbies?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had any thoughts about what may have caused this? What is going through your
mind? Did you have any ideas about what I may say or suggest today?
Sense ☐ 	I can see you are upset and very worried.
Curious ☐ 	Tell me about your grandpa’s experience.
Risk ☐ 	Has anyone in your family had similar symptoms in the past? Have you been abroad or
noticed any insect bites? Have you ever had an infection through sex?
Flags ☐ 	Has your vision changed recently? What have you noticed? Has your speech changed?
What about any weakness in the body where a leg or arm actually feels foppy? Have you
noticed any diference in your control when going to the toilet? Have you lost weight? Any
headaches or vomiting? Is your back painful? Have you had an injury?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have noticed unusual sensations now in both legs and your vision has
been troubling you. You became very concerned when you realised you were wobbly on
your feet. You have been passing urine more urgently. You fear it may be a similar problem
to your grandpa’s, but you are puzzled and worried by your symptoms. Is that correct?
O/E ☐ 	I would like to examine you please, take your pulse, blood pressure, breathing rate and
temperature, look at the nerves supplying the face, arms and legs and in the back of the eyes.
Is that okay? May I check the nerve supply to the bottom? Because you mentioned urgency
of urine, testing the sensation in the bottom is important. May I see you walk across the
room… and can you do a sample of urine please?
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate it is frightening when you have symptoms which you cannot explain, especially
when they come quickly together and it has made you wonder if this is similar to your
grandpa’s condition.
InCludE ☐ 	I don’t believe it is the same, however, as frstly your symptoms are diferent and secondly
the causes of problems in older people are usually very diferent from those in young people.
Impression ☐ 	However, I do think we need to ask the nerve doctors to have a look at you. I am question-
ing whether your nerves have become a little swollen, but the exact cause for why this has
happened is not yet clear.
Explanation ☐ Tis can happen for several reasons: following an infection, low vitamin B or where the
nerve supply is irritated by something pushing against the nerve. Te body can also attack
itself by mistake and afect the nerves so they become weak and lose their protective layer.
Instead of this protective layer, scar tissue forms and it blocks the normal signals from the
nerves, which is why you may be feeling the strange sensations. I think the last reason may
be the most likely but we need to do some tests to get the answer to why this has happened.
Do you have any questions? You may fnd your symptoms go away and then come back
again. Before we can give you the exact answer, we need to know what we are dealing with.
Specifcs ☐ 	I would like to ask you to sit in the waiting room where a nurse will call you through for
a blood test. Meanwhile I’m going to give the nerve doctors at the hospital a call to ask if
they want to see you today or in their rapid-access clinic.
Future ☐ 	At the hospital I expect they will examine you like I have done today and, if they feel it is
necessary, they may arrange an MRI scan. Tere may still be further tests you need before
we have the answer.
➠ 426
Neurology – 5

-- 441 of 575 --

➠ 427	
Patient’s Story 	Multiple Sclerosis
Doctor’s notes Lydia Cooper, 25 years. PMH: tonsillitis – 3 years ago. Medications: none.
How to act 	Nervous and anxious.
Start to cry when you explain your symptoms.
PC 	‘I’ve got this strange feeling in my leg – it’s the second time I’ve had it.’
History 	Six weeks ago you noticed your right foot was tingling within the shoe. You thought it must
have been your tight trainers but you noticed it again in bed last week but this time on the
lef foot and lower leg and today it has gone above your knee. You feel wobbly when you
walk today. You feel like you are going to fall over. A couple of months ago you realised that
you needed glasses. Your right eye has been blurry this week.
No headache or weight loss.
You have noticed urgency of urine and nearly missed the toilet yesterday but no other
urinary symptoms. Your bowels are normal.
No other symptoms on systemic enquiry.
Social 	You live with your boyfriend of 1 year. You are looking for work.
You lef college aged 16 years. Since then, you’ve found temporary work in ofces.
You smoked in your teens. You do not drink alcohol.
ICE 	You don’t know what may be causing it.
You hope you haven’t had a stroke like your grandpa 2 years ago.
Your grandpa lost all movement on the right side and his speech was diferent.
You don’t know what the doctor will say today.
Examination 	BP 120/60. HR 72 bpm regular. Apyrexial. RR 14.
No nystagmus, fundoscopy normal.
Visual acuity reduced right eye.
CN otherwise normal.
Reduced sensation from the lef toes to L3.
Weakness L4/5/S1–3/5.
Knee/ankle jerk increase, clonus and extensor plantar response – lef side.
Abnormal gait.
Reduced perianal sensation.
Urine dipstick normal.
Ask the doctor ‘Will it get better?’
Neurology – 5

-- 442 of 575 --

➠ 428
Learning Points 	Multiple Sclerosis
MS may take the course of relapsing-remitting, primary or secondary progressive.1
MS is usually a progressive disease.
Relapses may be triggered by infections, stress and post-partum.1,2
Epidemiology 	Incidence >M; common in young adults.
Risk factors2 	Genetic.
EB virus infection.
Cigarette smoking.
Obesity/poor diet in adolescence.
Low levels of vitamin D.
Latitude – prevalence increases with distance from the equator – north or
south – ?due to lower average levels of vitamin D because of lower levels of sunlight.
Symptoms1 	Visual changes, e.g. acuity, colour vision, visual felds (optic neuritis).
Reduced vision, loss of vision or double vision.
Hearing loss.
Facial weakness.
Altered sensations.
Limb weakness, gait problems.
Bladder and bowel control may be afected.
Altered temperature regulation, e.g. sweating.
Altered sexual function/impotence.
Lhermitte’s phenomenon: the feeling of electricity down the spine on neck fexion.
Cerebellar symptoms: ataxia, nystagmus, dysarthria and vertigo.
Cognitive dysfunction (late symptoms).
Diagnosis 	Relapsing, remitting – ≥2 demyelinating lesions in the brain/spinal cord occurring
in diferent places at diferent times.2
Primary progressive – progressive deterioration over 12 months.2
Investigations may include MRI, lumbar puncture and visual evoked potentials.
Differential diagnosis1 Sarcoidosis
Spinal cord compression
Vitamin B12 defciency
Neurosyphilis
SLE
Cerebrovascular disease
SOL/tumours
Lyme disease
Blood tests 	FBC, U&E, LFT, calcium, glucose, TFTs, ESR, CRP, vitamin B12, ANA (antinuclear
antibody), HIV ± syphilis.
Neurology – 5

-- 443 of 575 --

CHAPTER 18 OVERVIEW
Population Health: Promoting Health and
Preventing Disease
➠ 429
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Population Health: Promoting Health
and Preventing Disease
Learning points in this chapter include:
1 	Immunisation
Refusal
‘Disease prevention programmes for
common important communicable
... conditions’
‘Risk–beneft conversations in
relation to health protection (e.g. child
immunisation)’
MMR refusal, other reasons for
immunisation refusal and legal
considerations
2 	Cervical
Screening
Promote health – including cervical
screening
Cervical cytology, results and counselling
3 	Inappropriate
Use of
Services
‘The health of minorities and
marginalised populations’
Educating families with regards to how to
use local services
4 	High
Cholesterol
‘Cardiovascular health screening
including ... cholesterol checks’
Cardiovascular risk scores
Statin discussion
5 	Wants to Lose
Weight
‘Approaches to behaviour change and
their relevance to health promotion
and self-care’
The importance of understanding the
patient to help guide behaviour change
See also The Motivational Interview in the
Introduction
Extra
Notes
UK
Immunisation
Schedule
‘Immunisation programmes including:
• childhood immunisation schedules
• immunisation in pregnancy,
travellers and other important
situations, e.g. contact tracing
• vaccinations available on the NHS
• mandatory vaccinations for travel to
certain areas’
Current immunisation schedule
Live attenuated vaccines
Immunisation/
Vaccine
Preventable
Diseases
‘Disease prevention programmes for
common important communicable
conditions’
Immunisation/vaccine preventable
diseases
Symptoms, complications and mortality
rates
Cervical
Screening
Programme
‘Promote health – cervical screening’ 	Who should be screened
Other NHS
Screening
Programmes
‘NHS screening and immunisation
programmes’
‘Disease prevention programmes for
common and important communicable
and non-communicable diseases’
Bowel cancer, breast cancer, diabetic
retinopathy, AAA, newborn and antenatal
screening
Diet and
Exercise
Advice
NICE Guideline CG181. Cardiovascular
disease: risk assessment and reduction,
including lipid modifcation. September
2016
Statins 	Primary and secondary prevention

-- 444 of 575 --

CHAPTER 18 REFERENCES
Immunisation Refusal
1. 	https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/vaccinations/mmr-vaccine/. Apr 2020.
2. 	Harmsen I.A., Mollema L., Ruiter R.A.C. et al. Why parents refuse childhood vaccination: a qualitative study
using online focus groups. BMC Public Health 2013; 13: 1183. http://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/1471-2458-13-1183
3. 	https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/consent-to-treatment/children. Mar 2019.
4. 	https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/consent-the-green-book-chapter-2
Cervical Screening
1. 	https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/human-papillomavirus-(hpv)-and-cervical-cancer. Nov 2020.
2. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/cervical-screening/management/managing-hpv-cervical-cytology-re-
sults/. May 2021.
High Cholesterol
1. 	NICE Guideline CG181. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modifcation. Sep 2016.
2. 	https://qrisk.org/three/
Wants to Lose Weight
1. 	NICE Guideline CG189. Obesity: identifcation, assessment and management. Nov 2014.
UK Immunisation Schedule
1. 	https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/vaccinations/. Apr 2020.
2. 	https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/899422/PHE_
Routine_Childhood_Immunisation_Schedule_Jun2020_03.pdf
Immunisation/Vaccine Preventable Diseases
1. 	https://patient.info/doctor/measles-pro
2. 	http://www.who.int
3. 	http://www.cdc.gov/
4. 	https://patient.info/childrens-health/acute-diarrhoea-in-children/rotavirus#nav-0. Oct 2017.
Cervical Screening Programme
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/cervical-screening-cervical-smear-test-pro. May 2021.
2. 	Cervical cancer screening. https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/cervical-cancer/getting-diagnosed/
screening. Feb 2020.
3. 	Human papillomavirus (HPV) and cervical cancer. Nov 2020. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs380/
en/ Nov 2020.
4. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/cervical-screening/management/managing-hpv-cervical-cytology-re-
sults/. May 2021.
5. 	https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/screening/trans-and-non-binary-cancer-screening#screening40
Other NHS Screening Programmes
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/screening-programmes-in-the-uk. Apr 2014.
2. 	https://www.gov.uk/guidance/fetal-anomaly-screening-programme-overview. Contains public sector information
licensed by the Open Government Licence v3.0. Apr 2021.
Diet and Exercise Advice
1. 	NICE Guideline CG181. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modifcation. Sep 2016.
2. 	https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/559044/CMO_
Drinking_Gov_Resp.pdf. Contains public sector information licensed by the Open Government Licence v3.0. Aug
2016.
Statins
1. 	NICE Guideline CG181. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modifcation. Sep 2016.
2. 	https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta385. Feb 2016.
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 430
Population Health

-- 445 of 575 --

➠ 431
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Bhakti Shukla 	12 months 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Last appointment with practice nurse 2 weeks ago.
‘Attended for 12-month vaccinations. Hib/MenC, PCV, Meningitis
B given. Mum refused MMR. Asked to book telephone appoint-
ment with doctor for discussion.’
Investigations 	No information
Household 	Talika Shukla 	60 years 	F
Laksha Shukla 	32 years 	F
Aaditya Shukla 	32 years 	M

-- 446 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Immunisation Refusal
Open ☐ 	Tank you for taking the time to talk on the phone today. I understand you have concerns
about the MMR vaccine? Can you tell me more about what has been going through your
mind about this vaccination? Let’s discuss it today so you have all the information you need
to help you decide.
Sense ☐ 	I can hear you want to ensure you are making the best decision for Bhakti.
History ☐ 	First, can you please tell me more about your family and their health? I see Bhakti has had
her other vaccinations. Did she have any problems with them?
Risk ☐ 	Does Bhakti have any allergies? Is she otherwise ft and well?
ICE ☐ 	What do you know about the vaccination? Do you know what the letters MMR stand for?
Correct. Would you like me to explain more about those diseases? Okay, we will go through
that. How much do you know already? Was there any other information you were hoping
to gain today? Was there anything else you were hoping for? Is there anything else that
worries you apart from autism?
Experience ☐ 	What is your experience of autism? So you fear this condition in your children?
Curious ☐ 	How do you feel about vaccinations in general? What does Bhakti’s father think?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, generally, you are all for vaccination but you remember a lot of bad press about the MMR
vaccination in the news, in particular about a link between the MMR vaccine and autism. It
is important to you that Bhakti has the best education and, having seen another child with
autism, you hope to protect her as best you can. You would like some more information
about the MMR vaccination.
Explanation ☐ Te MMR vaccine is designed to protect against measles, mumps and rubella. Tis followed
a piece of research which was published in 1998.
InCludE ☐ 	You’re right, there was a scare about the MMR vaccination a few years back but this has
been discredited and I hope I can put your mind at rest about this.
Explanation ☐ Tere has been a lot of research into the possible link between autism and the MMR vacci-
nation, and no link has been found. Afer reviewing all the available information, the World
Health Organization recommends that the MMR vaccine is given. Is there anything I have
said that doesn’t make sense so far?
Explanation ☐ Measles is a virus which causes cold-like symptoms, high fever and a rash. It is ofen a mild
illness but can have serious complications such as pneumonia, deafness, blindness and
infammation of the brain called encephalitis. Tankfully the death rate is low but there are
about 1–2 deaths per 1000 cases. Mumps is a viral infection which afects the salivary glands
of the cheeks. It usually gets better on its own but can afect the testicles and ovaries which,
rarely, afects fertility. It, too, can cause deafness and can also cause meningitis. Rubella is
another virus which causes high fever, a rash and cold-like symptoms. Te main worry
with rubella is for women who are pregnant catching it, as it can cause problems with the
baby’s development.
Options ☐ 	As a parent you have the right to refuse vaccinations, but I hope I have reassured you that
the MMR vaccination is safe and that it is there to protect against some serious infections.
Recommend ☐ I recommend the vaccination to protect against these diseases as, afer reading the studies
myself, I am confdent there is no link to autism.
Empathy ☐ 	I understand it can be scary to make decisions which may put our children at risk.
Empower ☐ 	Would you like some information that you can read in your own time? I can email it to you
so you can discuss it with your husband. What are your thoughts at this time?
Future ☐ 	Let me know when you’ve made a decision and we can arrange an appointment if you wish
Bhakti to have the vaccination.
Specifcs ☐ 	Our nurse-led vaccination clinic is held every Tuesday afernoon from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. and
you would just need to phone reception, or call in, to book an appointment.
Safety net ☐ 	If you have any concerns or wish to discuss anything further, please give me a call.
Population Health – 1	
➠ 432

-- 447 of 575 --

➠ 433	
Patient’s Story 	Immunisation Refusal
Doctor’s notes Bhakti Shukla. 12 months. No information in medical history. Last appointment with
practice nurse 2 weeks ago.
‘Attended for 12-month vaccinations. Hib/MenC, PCV, Meningitis B given. Mum refused
MMR. Asked to book in with doctor for discussion.’
How to act 	Concerned
PC 	‘Hi Doctor, your nurse asked me to call you. I don’t want Bhakti to have the MMR vacci-
nation. I’ve heard it can cause autism.’
History 	Your name is Laksha Shukla. You are 32 years old and live with your husband, mother-in
law and your daughter Bhakti. Generally, you are all for vaccinations. You grew up in India
and saw the damage polio can do. You moved to the UK when you were 12 years old. You
remember reading about the MMR vaccination causing autism so you don’t want Bhakti
to have this. Bhakti is developing well, and she has recently started walking. She has been
well up until now and you have no concerns about her health.
Social 	You are a full-time mum. Your husband feels Bhakti should have the vaccination but thought
you should get some more information frst to put your mind at ease. You have Hindu faith.
ICE 	You believe there is a link between the MMR vaccination and autism. You would prefer
Bhakti not to have the vaccination. You aren’t sure what diseases the MMR vaccine protects
against, but you suspect they aren’t as bad as autism. You expect the doctor to be able to give
you information about the link between the MMR vaccination and autism. You would also
like to know more about measles, mumps and rubella. Your neighbour’s son has autism and
you have heard from his mum that he has real difculties at school. He struggles to learn
and you are very keen that Bhakti has a good education.
Population Health – 1

-- 448 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Immunisation Refusal
Te immunisation schedule is included in the Extra Notes section, along with information about the recent
changes and some further points.
MMR and autism?1
Te scare regarding the MMR vaccine and autism came about in 1998 afer a study was published in Te
Lancet. Te study claimed that the MMR vaccine had been linked to regression (loss of skills), autistic
spectrum disorders, infammation of the small intestine (enterocolitis) and that children with autism had
higher levels of measles antibodies in their bloodstream. Since this study was published, the claims have
been widely discredited in follow-up studies. Tere were faws in the original study which could have led to
bias. Based on the subsequent trials, there is no reason to suspect that the MMR vaccine is linked to autism,
and therefore the MMR is recommended by the World Health Organization because it is more efective than
giving the separate vaccines for measles, mumps and rubella. Interestingly, the rates of autism continued
to increase in Japan even afer the vaccine had been withdrawn, adding further evidence of no causal link.
Other reasons for vaccination refusal
Tere is a multitude of reasons for parents refusing vaccination. Consider the following and how you would
discuss these with the parents. One study2 found the following were ofen cited:
• 	Perceptions about the child’s body and immune system – too young for immune system to cope with
immunisation or child already protected by breast feeding.
• 	Perceived risks of disease. Te belief of a low risk of catching the illness, the belief that conditions can
be easily treated and the belief the diseases are not serious.
• 	Vaccine efcacy. Te belief that the vaccines don’t work.
• 	Side efects.
• 	Perceived advantages of experiencing the disease.
• 	Prior negative experience with vaccination.
Legal considerations3,4
Although the consent of one person with parental responsibility for a child is usually sufcient (see Section
2(7) of the Children Act 1989), if one parent agrees to immunisation but the other disagrees, the immuni-
sation should not be carried out unless both parents can agree to immunisation or there is a specifc court
approval that the immunisation is in the best interests of the child.
➠ 434
Population Health – 1

-- 449 of 575 --

➠ 435
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Chloe Atherton 	25 years 	F
PMH 	Tonsillitis aged 22 years
Viral respiratory tract infection aged 14 years
Urinary tract infection aged 4 years
Medications 	Rigevidon
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Last appointment with practice nurse 3 weeks ago. Cervical smear
taken.
Investigations 	Recent cervical cytology result: high risk HPV detected, mild
dyskaryosis. A colposcopy referral has been made.
Household 	No household contacts

-- 450 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Cervical Screening
Open ☐ 	Firstly let me reassure you that the test result has not found cancer. Before we discuss it in
more detail, may I ask you a few background questions to ensure I understand what has
happened so far? Tis will help me interpret your result.
History ☐ 	What led to you having the test done? Are you otherwise well? Any problems with your
periods or bleeding pattern? Do you smoke? Do you work? Regarding your women’s health,
when was your last period? Have you any abnormal bleeding? Have you ever been pregnant?
Do you have a sexual partner? Do you have any abnormal vaginal discharge? Have you ever
had a sexually transmitted infection?
Risk ☐ 	Any bleeding between periods or afer sex? Have you had any pain? Have you ever had a
smear test before? Is there any family history of cervical cancer or women’s problems? I’d
like to reassure you this is not connected to the ovary.
ICE ☐ 	You have mentioned that you are worried about cancer. Is there anything else that has been
concerning you? Were you hoping I would do anything in particular today?
SummarICE ☐ 	So you have no worrying symptoms, but received a letter telling you that your smear was
abnormal and that you have been referred to the hospital. You are worried that you have
cancer and whether this could be related to your aunt’s cancer. You are concerned about
the colposcopy test and whether it will be painful.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about colposcopy tests already? Have you known anyone who has had
it done? Or had problems with the cervix?
Explanation ☐ Te cervix is the neck of your womb. I can see from your record that HPV was found. So,
the cells from your cervix were looked at under a microscope and the middle of the cells
looked a little abnormal. In your case, the changes are only mild. Ofen, in cases like yours,
the cells will go back to normal all on their own. However, we know that cervical cancer
is caused by HPV, so we ofer a further test called colposcopy to look at the cervix in more
detail. Smear tests look for HPV and changes in the cervix, which if lef, may develop into
cancer. We can then monitor the cervix or treat it to prevent cancer. Is there anything I have
said that you are unclear about or that I haven’t explained well enough? Would you like to
know about colposcopy?
Explanation ☐ Colposcopy is a procedure in which a doctor looks at the cervix under a microscope directly.
You will be asked to undress from the waist down and usually sit in a special chair which
supports your legs. A speculum is put into the vagina so the cervix can be seen, like when
you had the smear test. Te doctor will usually put a special stain on the cervix which shows
any abnormal cells. If any are found, the doctor will ofen take a biopsy or ofer to treat the
cells there and then by removing them afer giving a local anaesthetic. If this happens, the
doctor will explain this to you.
InCludE ☐ 	I know you were concerned about this – like a smear test, it can be uncomfortable but you
really shouldn’t experience pain. I can reassure you this is a very diferent condition to
ovarian cancer.
Options ☐ 	How do you feel about the colposcopy now? Do you feel you will go?
Empathy ☐ 	I understand getting abnormal results is scary, especially if there is a possibility of cancer.
But hopefully there are just some abnormal cells which can be taken away.
Empower ☐ 	Would you like me to email some information to read in your own time?
Future ☐ 	We will get a letter from the hospital afer your appointment, but I would be happy to talk
to you afer the appointment if you’d like to discuss what happened.
Specifcs ☐ 	You should receive a letter for the colposcopy within the next 2 weeks. Please let me know
if you haven’t heard by then.
Safety net ☐ 	In the meantime, if you do have any bleeding not during your period or pain please let me
know. Please don’t hesitate to contact me if you have questions.
➠ 436
Population Health – 2

-- 451 of 575 --

➠ 437	
Patient’s Story 	Cervical Screening
Doctor’s notes Chloe Atherton, 25 years. PMH: tonsillitis aged 22 years. Viral respiratory tract infection
aged 14 years. Urinary tract infection aged 4 years. Medication: Rigevidon.
How to act 	Concerned.
Investigations 	Recent cervical cytology result: mild dyskaryosis, high-risk HPV detected. A colposcopy
referral has been made.
PC 	‘Hi Doctor, I’ve recently had my smear done but the results have come back abnormal. Do
I have cancer?’
History 	You attended for your frst cervical cytology test 3 weeks ago following receiving an invi-
tation afer your 25th birthday. You were unsure about going for the test but discussed it
with a friend who is older than you and she said the test was fne, so you booked in. Te
nurse doing the test explained that if the results were abnormal you would be referred to the
hospital for more tests. You are worried about this. Before the test you had no symptoms;
no intermenstrual bleeding, no post-coital bleeding and no dyspareunia. Tere is no family
history of cervical cancer but your aunt died of ovarian cancer and you thought this could
be related. You take the oral contraceptive pill so feel pregnancy is unlikely; you always
remember to take it. Last menstrual period 1 week ago.
Social 	You work as a barmaid and waitress. You have a boyfriend. You have been together 3 years.
He knows about the result and how worried you are, so has ofered to go to the hospital
with you.
You don’t smoke and only drink alcohol at weekends.
ICE 	You think you may have cervical cancer. You are concerned about the colposcopy test as
you don’t know what this will involve. You hope the doctor will be able to reassure you that
you don’t have cancer and explain the colposcopy test to you. You fear it will be painful.
Population Health – 2

-- 452 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Cervical Screening
Details of the cervical screening programme can be found in the Extra Notes section.
Important counselling points
• 	Te screening test is a test for HPV and not cancer cells. Te purpose of the test is to fnd out if you have
high-risk HPV so that you can be treated before cancer develops.
• 	Colposcopy is a procedure to look at the cervix in more detail. It is similar to having a smear in that
a speculum is inserted to make the cervix visible, but then the doctor will look at the cervix using a
microscope called a colposcope. Te colposcope itself doesn’t enter the body. Te doctor will usually
put a special stain on the cervix to show up any abnormal areas.
• 	If abnormal areas are found, biopsies may be taken or the doctor may decide to treat the cells there
and then. If that is the case, the doctor will explain what they would like to do. Any removal of tissue is
usually done with local anaesthetic.
Results1
• 	HPV primary screening. Cells are frst tested for high-risk HPV – HPV-16 and HPV-18.
• 	Tere are 100 diferent types of human papillomavirus (HPV) but only these two are considered high
risk for cervical cancer. Tese cause 70% of cervical cancers.
Management of cervical cytology results2
Result 	Management
No HPV found = no high-risk HPV 	Recall – 3 or 5 years’ time depending on your age
HPV found with no cell changes = high-risk HPV
present but no changes to cells
Recall – 1 year to check HPV gone
HPV found with cell changes = high-risk HPV +
cervical cell changes
Colposcopy
➠ 438
Population Health – 2

-- 453 of 575 --

➠ 439
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Sara Azmeh 	28 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No information
Household 	Yusuf Azmeh 	29 years 	M
Lilah Azmeh 	7 years 	F
Najm Azmeh 	5 years 	M
Akram Azmeh 	4 years 	M
Rasha Azmeh 	6 months 	F
During a recent ‘Unplanned Admissions Review’ your practice has noted that this
family have been attending A&E and out-of-hours services regularly. You have sent
a letter to the parents to ask them to come in to discuss the health of the family
and the services available.
7 A&E attendances in 2 months with viral URTI symptoms between four children.
1 A&E attendance with eczema (Akram).
1 A&E attendance with vomiting (Rasha).
1 out-of-hours attendance due to running out of salbutamol inhaler (Lilah).
1 attendance to out-of-hours with hay fever symptoms (Yusuf).
No admissions required, discharged back to GP care afer each attendance.

-- 454 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Inappropriate Use of Services
Open ☐ 	Tank you for talking on the phone. I wanted to discuss your family’s health and ofer help
and support. As you have recently joined our practice, could you tell me more about your
family? Welcome to Nottingham. How are you settling in? What were your experiences in
Syria? I’m sorry to hear what your family has been through.
Impact ☐ 	How have you coped with the stress of the move? We are here to help your family.
History ☐ 	Are you well physically and mentally? And your husband? Have you made friends? Did you
work in Syria? Giving yourselves time to settle in is important, but do you have any plans?
Ah, best of luck with your future studies. Are your children in school? Tell me about each
member of your family; how they are coping and their health.
Sense ☐ 	I sense you are particularly worried about breathing problems in the children.
Curious ☐ 	Have you had any bad experiences with asthma or chest infections?
ICE ☐ 	How do you feel the children are at present? Do you have any particular worries about
yourself, your husband or your children? Have you had any thoughts about what could
help? Was there anything you were hoping I would do today?
Experience ☐ 	Do you know where you can get help from if someone in the family is poorly?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, your family have moved away from where you felt in great danger and it
has been hard for you all. You feel exhausted and miss your loved ones, your husband has
the stress of trying to fnd work and your children have been quiet. You feel this is from the
shock of what they have experienced. You worry about Lilah’s asthma, Akram’s eczema and
don’t know where to get Rasha weighed. You would like some information about healthcare
in England. Let’s make a plan together.
Empathy ☐ 	I cannot imagine what you have been through, but I am glad you now feel safe.
Explanation ☐ In the UK there are lots of diferent ways to seek help. For problems like hay fever or colds,
you can go to a pharmacy where there are medications which you can buy. Te pharmacists
are experienced in giving advice for these problems, so they are ofen a good frst point
of call. You may be able to sign up to ‘Pharmacy First’ which enables you to get free pre-
scriptions for some things like paracetamol for the children. At the practice we can ofer
emergency appointments if your family are unwell. Please phone our receptionist who will
provide you with an appointment. We also have doctors and nurses at the practice who
help to manage long-term conditions like asthma or eczema. When the practice is closed
and your problem cannot wait, you can phone 111. Tis includes evenings, night-time and
weekends. Tey will provide advice or arrange an appointment with another GP. If someone
is very poorly or has been in a bad accident, this is when you should go to A&E or call 999
on the telephone. Tis is a lot to take in. Any questions so far? It must be difcult when
things are so diferent in a new country.
Recommend ☐ I recommend we book Akram in to assess his eczema and also see Lilah for her asthma?
Specifcs ☐ 	I’d also like to refer you to our health visitor service. Health visitors look afer families with
children under 5 years old and can advise you on minor problems and do health checks like
weighing children. You can just turn up with Rasha to the health visitor’s clinic once a week
to get Rasha weighed. Te health visitor can also put you in touch with other services like
Sure Start which supports mums and runs mum and baby groups. Does any of that sound
helpful? If you continue to worry about your children, we could arrange counselling for
them.
Empower ☐ 	Would you like me to email you an information sheet with the practice information? Helpful
website addresses include NHS choices and patient.info.
Future ☐ 	Shall I book those appointments for you? I look forward to meeting your family.
Safety net ☐ 	If you are ever worried about a health problem, don’t hesitate to give us a call.
➠ 440
Population Health – 3

-- 455 of 575 --

➠ 441	
Patient’s Story 	Inappropriate Use of Services
Doctor’s notes Sara Azmeh, 28 years. PMH: no information. During a recent ‘Unplanned Admissions
Review’ your practice has noted that this family have been attending A&E and out-of-hours
services regularly. You have sent a letter to the parents to ask them to book a telephone
consultation to discuss the health of the family and the services available.
How to act 	Confused.
PC 	‘Hello Doctor, you have asked me phone to discuss this letter I have received.’
History 	You, your husband and four children moved to the UK 4 months ago. You are Syrian asylum
seekers. You are unsure how the healthcare system works in the UK. You love your children
dearly and get frightened when they are unwell. You and your husband are both well. Over
recent years you have had very little access to healthcare in Syria and worry about Lilah’s
asthma which isn’t well controlled. You have had an inhaler from the practice which helps
but she keeps running out. You also have trouble managing Akram’s eczema; although you
know it isn’t life threatening, it ofen becomes sore and stops him sleeping. You are aware
that you have been to A&E quite a lot but are unsure what else you should do when the
practice is closed or if you can’t get through on the phone. Afer you had been to hospital
a couple of times, they told you to ring 111 next time, so you did when you required the
extra inhaler for Lilah and they helped your husband when he had problems with his nose.
Social 	Your asylum request is being processed at present but you are very hopeful that it will be
granted. Your husband used to work in local government in Syria. Since having children,
you have been a full-time mum but do hope to train as a nurse in the future. You have met
a nice elderly lady who is your neighbour and has been helping to look afer the children if
you need to run errands. You hope your children can start school soon and your husband
will fnd work.
In Syria you were very frightened and your family walked for days to safety. You feel
exhausted but you are thankful that you are safe. You cry when you think of home. You lef
your elderly relatives who were not able to travel. You lost contact with your parents but
believe they are safe as they were with you until you crossed the border. Te children have
become very quiet since you lef. You imagine they are shocked but you give them lots of
love and tell them they will be okay now.
ICE 	You feel that if the children are poorly you should take them to A&E where they can see
a doctor and will be safe. You are concerned about Lilah’s asthma and Akram’s eczema.
You also wonder where you should get Rasha weighed. You expect the doctor to tell you
of for going to A&E too much but you worry about your children and didn’t know what
else to do. You hope that the doctor may help your children’s chronic problems but you do
not feel you should tell the doctor what to do. You knew a few babies in Syria who died of
chest infections as they didn’t get seen by a doctor quickly enough, so you worry if any of
the children start coughing.
Population Health – 3

-- 456 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Inappropriate Use of Services
Avoiding unplanned admissions and directing appropriate use of services can be quite difcult. It is impor-
tant that patients are given as much information as possible to allow them to make the right decisions
regarding their health.
Make sure you are aware of what is available in your area
• 	How do you access your health visitor/midwife/community nurses/community mental health services?
How can patients access these in an emergency or out-of-hours?
• 	Does your practice ofer extended opening hours or is there an NHS walk-in centre nearby?
• 	Do your patients know about the 111 helpline?
• 	Is ‘Pharmacy First’ available in your area? (Scheme running in certain areas to allow patients to receive
prescription medicines for some conditions without the patient seeing a GP.)
Chronic conditions
In patients with chronic health problems such as asthma, COPD and heart failure, it is good practice to
develop a care plan or action plan with the patient. For example, an asthma action plan would be based
on symptoms and peak expiratory fow rate and include when the patient should go to see a GP or phone
an ambulance. Likewise, does the COPD suferer have clear instructions about when to start antibiotics or
steroids? Tese care plans can be efective in reducing hospital attendances by empowering the patients to
manage their condition themselves and giving them good advice about which signs and symptoms need
routine, urgent or emergency attention.
➠ 442
Population Health – 3

-- 457 of 575 --

➠ 443
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Vincent Riley 	60 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Ex-smoker
Medications 	Amlodipine 10 mg daily
Allergies 	No allergies
Consultations 	Nurse appointment for bloods and blood pressure.
Letter to patient. ‘Dear Mr Riley. Tank you for having your blood
tests for your medication review. I would be grateful if you could
please make an appointment to speak to the doctor on the phone
to discuss your cholesterol. Best wishes. Dr Emily Blount.’
Investigations 	BP 124/80
Height 185 cm
Weight 70 kg
BMI 20.4
Cholesterol/HDL ratio 5.8
QRISK3 15%
Household 	No household members registered

-- 458 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	High Cholesterol
Open ☐ 	Tank you for phoning. Is there anything else that you would like to talk about?
History ☐ 	Your cholesterol is a little high but what we need to do about this depends on your general
health. I’m interested to know more about you. How do you feel your health is? You have an
active lifestyle… How ofen a week are you doing exercise? When did you stop smoking? How
much alcohol do you drink? Who is in your life?
Flags ☐ 	Do you ever become breathless or have any chest or leg pains?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you feel this is a waste of time but, if there is anything we can do to protect you from
having angina, a heart attack or stroke, I want to ofer help. Are you interested in discussing ways
to prevent problems down the line?
Risk ☐ 	Do you have a family history of angina or heart disease in relatives when they were under
60 years old?
ICE ☐ 	Since reading the letter we sent you, have you been concerned? Has anything else gone through
your mind? Do you have an idea about what I may talk about today?
Curious ☐ 	I’m interested… Tell me more about how you have come across statins?
Impact ☐ 	It sounds as if you are healthy but is there anything more you can try, do you think, to improve
your diet? Do you avoid saturated fats in your food?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you feel well and your blood pressure is well controlled. Your cholesterol is slightly
high. Your friends have had bad experiences with statins.
O/E ☐ 	It would be helpful if you could come into the surgery so I can feel your pulse and listen to your
heart for a check-up. Could you book an appointment later this week? Tankyou.
Empower ☐ 	Assuming that your pulse and heart are normal when I examine you, I would want to ensure
you have the information you need to make an informed decision.
Impression ☐ 	We put all the information into a medical calculator. It is not perfect but it is based on research so we
can share with you, if you wish, your predicted risk of having a heart attack or a stroke in the next
10 years. Are you interested in knowing your risk? We take into account if your vessels may have
been afected by cigarettes or require blood pressure treatment. Your risk is predicted to be 15%.
Tis means that if there were 100 people just like you, about 15 of them would have a heart attack
or stroke in the next 10 years. Tis is not extremely high but we want to do everything we can to
bring that down. Your cholesterol was 5.8, which is higher than it should be. Research advises that
if your risk if greater than 10%, you may beneft from a statin treatment. What are your thoughts?
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate I am being pessimistic when talking about events like heart attacks and strokes,
which is not what you want to hear when you do all you can for your health. I appreciate this is
a big decision as it involves taking a tablet every day.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about statins? Do you know how they work?
Explanation ☐ 	Statins lower cholesterol, but seem to have extra beneft above what we would expect from just
lowering cholesterol, potentially stabilising or even reversing furring of the arteries. Because you
already lead a healthy lifestyle and have stopped smoking, the only other thing we can change
to reduce your risk is lower your cholesterol.
Recommend ☐ I recommend we start atorvastatin 20 mg, taken at night. Like all tablets there are potential
side efects that can include feeling unwell with stomach and muscle aches. Rarely, statins can
cause muscle breakdown. Statins can also afect the liver but we monitor this and if it occurs we
stop the statin. Many people feel well on statins and they usually do lower cholesterol. Whether
you choose to take the statin or not will depend on your own perception of the risk versus the
downsides of taking a tablet every day.
Options ☐ 	What do you think? You are always welcome to come to discuss this again, perhaps when I see
you to listen to your heart and check your pulse and we will of course continue to invite you for
an annual health check. Are you interested in reading material? I can email this to you to read
at home. Do you have any questions?
Future ☐ 	I respect your decision. Tank you for taking the time to listen to me today and let’s see you
soon to check your heart and pulse. If you ever want to talk more about cholesterol, please don’t
hesitate to make another telephone appointment.
➠ 444
Population Health – 4

-- 459 of 575 --

➠ 445	
Patient’s Story 	High Cholesterol
Doctor’s notes Vincent Riley, 60 years. PMH: hypertension and ex-smoker. Medications: amlodipine
10 mg daily.
Consultations: Nurse appointment for bloods and blood pressure. Letter to patient. ‘Dear
Mr Riley. Tank you for having your blood tests for your medication review. I would be
grateful if you could please make a telephone appointment with the doctor to discuss your
cholesterol. Best wishes. Dr Emily Blount.’
Investigations: BP 124/80. Height: 185 cm. Weight: 70 kg. BMI: 20.4. Cholesterol/HDL ratio:
5.8. QRISK3 15.0%.
How to act 	Apprehensive about why the doctor has called you today.
PC 	‘I had a letter asking me to talk to you about cholesterol treatment.’
History 	You feel very well. Apart from well controlled high blood pressure you have no other med-
ical history. No-one in your family has had a heart attack, angina or a stroke.
Social 	You are a semi-professional golfer but are starting to spend more time helping around the
clubhouse. You remain active, usually playing a few rounds a week and you also enjoy run-
ning and cycling. You eat a healthy diet. You are divorced and have a new female partner
since last year. Tings are going well and you are very happy. You used to smoke until the
age of 48 years, on average 10 cigarettes a day. You drink 1–2 beers a couple of nights a week.
You have three children with your ex-wife and they live in diferent parts of the world.
ICE 	You are not concerned about your health. You feel very ft and active.
You ask the doctor: ‘Is this a box-ticking exercise, Doc?’
You have heard about statins. Several of your friends have tried them and felt awful on
them.
You are interested to hear what the doctor has to say but you do not accept any cholesterol
treatment.
Examination 	HS normal. HR 64 bpm regular. No stigmata of hyperlipidaemia.
Population Health – 4

-- 460 of 575 --

Learning Points 	High Cholesterol
Notes from NICE Guideline CG181. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid
modifcation. September 2016.
Who should we screen using CVD risk score (e.g. QRISK3*)?1,2
Use a systematic strategy to identify people who are likely to be at high risk.
People with estimated 10-year risk of CVD of 10% or more should be prioritised for full formal risk assess-
ment. Use the QRISK risk assessment tool to assess CVD risk for the primary prevention of CVD in people
up to and including age 84 years.
Exclude type 1 diabetics and those with inherited disorders of lipid metabolism.
Exclude eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and/or albuminuria – see CKD guidance.
Both the above groups are considered to be at increased risk of CVD.
Consider people aged 85 or older to be at increased risk of CVD because of age alone, particularly people
who smoke or have raised blood pressure. ‘For people 85 years or older consider atorvastatin 20 mg as statins
may be of beneft in reducing the risk of non-fatal myocardial infarction. Be aware of factors that may make
treatment inappropriate.’1
CVD risk scores will underestimate risk in people with…
HIV, serious mental health conditions, taking immunosuppressants, antipsychotics and corticosteroids and
with autoimmune and systemic infammatory disorders… Tose taking antihypertensive or lipid modifca-
tion therapy or who have recently stopped smoking.1
Investigations
‘Treat comorbidities and secondary causes of dyslipidaemia.’1
Address smoking, alcohol, obesity and hypertension.
Investigations: lipid screen (non-fasting), HbA1c, eGFR and renal function, ALT and TSH.
Screening for familial hypercholesterolaemia
Ask about ‘the likelihood of a familial lipid disorder rather than the use of strict lipid cut-of values alone
and consider if: a total cholesterol concentration more than 7.5 mmol/L and a family history of premature
coronary heart disease…
Refer if the total cholesterol concentration >9.0 mmol/L or a non-HDL cholesterol concentration of
>7.5 mmol/L even in the absence of a frst-degree family history of premature coronary heart disease.’1
For information about managing raised cholesterol and triglycerides – see Extra Notes.
*QRISK3 is in use at the time of publication but new versions are released each Spring, so keep a look out
for these.
➠ 446
Population Health – 4

-- 461 of 575 --

➠ 447
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Kirsten Cameron 	40 years 	F
PMH 	Gastro-oesophageal refux disease
Gallstones
Depression
BMI 40
3 × NVD
Tonsillitis
Mild OA knees
Menorrhagia
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Recent consultations for OA knees and directed to physiotherapy.
Investigations 	X-ray knees – mild OA
Household 	Richard Cameron 	46 years 	M
Winnie Cameron 	7 years 	F
Grace Cameron 	6 years 	F
Tomas Cameron 	4 years 	M

-- 462 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Wants to Lose Weight
Open ☐ 	Tell me more about what has led to you phoning me today? What has triggered the call this
week in particular? Tere can be emotional or social stress that can all lead to weight gain.
Are either of these factors something you can relate to?
Sense ☐ 	I’m hearing from you that this has now become a priority, is that correct?
Impact ☐ 	What impact has this problem had on your life? Anything else?
Curious ☐ 	You say it gets you down, what do you mean? What triggers feeling this way?
ICE ☐ 	What is your goal? What do you think will be the challenges to you achieving that? Do you
have any ideas or wishes about how you would like to achieve this? What did you think I
would suggest today? I can see it is important we tailor our plan to your busy life otherwise
we are swimming against the tide.
History ☐ 	It’s helpful to know more about you and the stressors in your life so we can plan around
them. Tell me about past problems with your health. And now? What have you tried? With
a job and three children, what exercise do you manage to do at the moment? Do you smoke?
How much alcohol do you drink? Who else in your life might support you?
Empathy ☐ 	It sounds like being overweight has afected your confdence, which was perhaps already
low following the depression.
Empower ☐ 	Usually we need to put several things in place to help, as well as medication. What other
steps could be squeezed into your schedule if your husband and friend support you? Are
there any health professionals you might fnd helpful?
Impression ☐ 	It sounds as if you have taken what the doctor said, about losing weight to help your
knees, seriously – and you now feel this has become a priority for your mental and physical
well-being. Tis problem has contributed to your pain, feeling down and low confdence
with your partner. Can you think of any other problems it has led to?
Experience ☐ 	What problems might it also cause in your future?
Explanation ☐ You are right; the health of vessels supplying the heart and brain can be at risk.
Risk ☐ 	I would like to do some tests to make sure there is no medical issue contributing to your
weight gain. I would like to test your ovulation hormones and thyroid. Also, can we do a
health check of your cholesterol, sugar level, kidney function and BP?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, your knee pain and your friend’s encouragement have led you to think about
the impact your weight has had on your life. It is important for you to gain some control
back, because your big fears are that your depression may return and further knee pain.
You have a good relationship with your husband but you feel sad that you do not have a
sexual relationship.
InCludE ☐ 	You worried that I may say you should eat less and exercise more or join a programme,
which is not practical advice for your circumstances, and you enjoy food and cooking. You
believe your husband and friend will support you and can ofer the fexibility you need,
time-wise. Your goal is to run up that hill and meanwhile you plan to enjoy learning some
new healthy recipes. Have I got it?
Recommend ☐ I recommend a tablet called orlistat which reduces fat absorption. Your bowels become loose
and it may give you a tummy upset as you pass more fat in the stool. Is this something you
would like to try?
Specifcs ☐ 	Please take orlistat 3 times daily at meal times. Can you make an appointment with the
nurse for the blood tests, BP and an up-to-date weight?
Future ☐ 	We will check your weight again in 3 months’ time and you may continue this tablet if you
have lost 5% of your current weight. It can also help to use calorie counting apps on your
phone to keep track of what you’re eating, and some women fnd exercise videos, which
they can do at their convenience at home, helpful.
Safety net ☐ 	If your mood does drop, or you are concerned about anything, please phone again.
➠ 448
Population Health – 5

-- 463 of 575 --

➠ 449	
Patient’s Story 	Wants to Lose Weight
Doctor’s notes 	Kirsten Cameron, 40 years. PMH: gastro-oesophageal refux disease, gallstones, depression,
3 × NVD, tonsillitis, mild OA knees, menorrhagia. BMI 40. Medications: none. Recent con-
sultations for OA knees and directed to physiotherapy. Investigations: X-ray knees – mild
OA.
How to act 	Quiet and embarrassed.
PC 	‘Doctor, I would like help to lose weight please.’
History 	Your knees are becoming increasingly painful. Originally you were worried about arthritis
but, following an X-ray, the doctor explained that treatment for osteoarthritis is either
anti-infammatories, injections or exercises. You were told they are not bad enough for sur-
gery but have been advised to lose weight. You do not have time to do the physio exercises
or lose weight. You have three small children at home. You do the school run afer work.
You have had multiple health problems, but currently only your knees are bothering you.
Your depression resolved about a year ago but you don’t have any confdence. It is obvious
that your husband does not fnd you attractive as he has no interest in having sex. ‘It gets
me down.’ You remain good companions. He would be supportive of you losing weight
and would help with the children if you asked. It has just become routine that you run the
home. Reading women’s magazines gets you down. You used to be a size 12 and, over the
past decade, you have gradually gained weight; especially when you were depressed and
you used to binge eat. You spoke to your friend and she told you to see the GP. Your friend
said she would help with the kids or go on a walk with you at night. Tere’s a lovely view
from the top of the hill near your house and you have laughed with your friend that in a
year you will run up it. You also know you comfort eat. You would like to get into healthy
eating and might start searching for new recipes on websites. You enjoy cooking.
Social 	Your husband is an undertaker. You are a milliner. You do not smoke. You rarely drink
alcohol as money is tight and you save where you can.
ICE 	You are aware that you are at risk of heart attacks and increasing knee pain. You know that
you have to eat less and exercise more; easier said than done. You are tired at the end of
the day. Your big fear is your depression returning. You felt at rock bottom at the time and
it impacted on enjoying life with your children. Ten you felt guilty that you were missing
out on their precious years. (Your mood is generally okay at present.) You would like the
doctor to provide a weight loss tablet rather than tell you to go to an exercise class which
you have never been able to commit to. You would like practical solutions for your personal
circumstances and feel other doctors have just told you to join Weight Watchers or go to
classes. If the doctor explores options with you, you will agree to increase your exercise but
you cannot commit to an exercise programme as you need to be at work or home.
Population Health – 5

-- 464 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Obesity
Notes from NICE guideline CG189. Obesity: identifcation, assessment and management. Nov 2014.
‘Tailor the components of the planned weight management programme to the person’s preferences, initial
ftness, health status and lifestyle.’1
‘Te main requirement of a dietary approach to weight loss is that total energy intake should be less
than energy expenditure.’1
Asian family
origin 	Consider lower threshold for intervention.
Children 	‘Clinical intervention should be considered for children with a BMI at or above the 91st
centile… Encourage parents (or carers) to take main responsibility for lifestyle changes
in children…’1 Multicomponent interventions include behaviour change strategies for
activity and eating behaviours.
Multicomponent interventions 	Te treatment of choice. Tese include behaviour change strategies for
increasing activity, improving eating behaviour and diet quality and reducing energy intake.
Examination 	BP, waist circumference.
Investigations 	Lipid and HbA1c
Orlistat 	‘Only prescribe orlistat as part of an overall plan for managing obesity in adults who meet
one of the following criteria: a BMI of 28 kg/m2 or more with associated risk factors or a
BMI of 30 kg/m2 or more.’1
‘Continue orlistat therapy beyond 3 months only if the person has lost at least 5% of their
initial body weight.’1
Exercise 	Encourage adults to do at least 45–60 minutes of moderate or greater intensity physical
activity on 5 or more days a week. However, higher amounts may be needed to prevent
obesity without dietary changes.1
Diets 	Suggest ‘diets that have a 600 kcal/day defcit…
Consider low-calorie diets (800–1600 kcal/day), but be aware these are less likely to be
nutritionally complete.’1
Beware of free sugar content in fruit, juices and drinks.
Bariatric
surgery 	‘Consider if: BMI >40 or BMI >35 + comorbidities or BMI >30 + recent onset DM as long
as they are also receiving or will receive assessment in a tier 3 service or equivalent.’1
Consider a lower threshold in the Asian population.
‘All appropriate non-surgical measures have been tried but the person has not achieved or
maintained adequate, clinically benefcial weight loss…
Te person has been receiving or will receive intensive management in a tier 3 service ...
Te person is generally ft for anaesthesia and surgery…
Te person commits to the need for long-term follow-up.’1
➠ 450
Population Health – 5

-- 465 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	UK Immunisation Schedule1,2
➠ 451
Age 	Immunisation
8 weeks 	DTaP/IPV(polio)/Hib/HepB – diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, Haemophilus infuenzae type
B, hepatitis B
Rotavirus gastroenteritis, oral drops
Meningitis B
12 weeks 	DTaP/IPV(polio)/Hib/Hep B – 2nd dose
Rotavirus gastroenteritis, oral drops
PCV (pneumococcal – 13 serotypes)
16 weeks 	DTaP/IPV(polio)/Hib/Hep B – 3rd dose
Meningitis B – 2nd dose
1 year
old (on or
after 1st
birthday)
Hib/MenC = 4th dose of Hib and 1st dose of MenC
MMR – measles, mumps and rubella
PCV booster (pneumococcal)
Meningitis B – 3rd dose
Eligible
paediatric
age group
Infuenza (each year from September). Given to all at-risk children and other specifc age
cohorts. See relevant Public Health publications for national childhood fu immunisation
programme details
3 years 4
months
DTaP/IPV(polio)
MMR – 2nd dose
Boys and
girls aged
12–13
HPV – 2 doses, 6–24 months apart
14 years
old (school
year 9)
Td/IPV (tetanus, diphtheria and polio)
Meningitis ACWY
Check MMR status
High-risk
children
Hep B – at birth, 4 weeks and 12 months, if mother infected with Hep B
TB – at birth, if local incidence ≥40/100,000 or parent/grandparent born in high incidence
country
Infuenza – at-risk children, from age 6 months to 17 years
Pregnant
women
Infuenza – during fu season, at any stage of pregnancy
Pertussis – from 16 weeks’ gestation
Adults 	MenACWY. If not received offer to students up to 25 years
Infuenza and pneumococcal for those aged over 65 years and those in high-risk
groups
Td/IPV(polio) – for those not fully immunised as a child or travelling to high risk areas
Shingles vaccine for adults either aged 70 or 78 (plus catch up for adults born after 2/9/1942 if
aged <80 years and not previously immunised)
Live attenuated vaccines: MMR, chickenpox, rotavirus, yellow fever, oral polio, BCG, typhoid, Japanese
encephalitis, rabies and cholera. They should not be given to immunosuppressed or pregnant patients.
Population Health

-- 466 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Immunisation/Vaccine Preventable Diseases
Information collated from Patient.info,1,4 WHO,2 NIH Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention3
Measles1 – cold-like symptoms, high temperature, white/grey spots inside cheeks, red/brown diffuse
rash starting on head and neck then spreading to body. Serious complications: pneumonia, encephalitis,
blindness, deafness.
Mumps – painful swelling of the parotid glands. May cause testicular pain/swelling and can also afect
ovaries. Serious complications: meningitis, fertility problems, deafness.
Rubella – red/pink rash of small spots with fever, viral symptoms and enlarged lymph nodes. Can cause
complications in pregnancy (fetal abnormalities).
Diphtheria – high fever, thick grey/white coating back of throat with sore throat and breathing difculties.
Bacterial infection. Serious complications: myocarditis, problems with nervous system. 5–10% mortality
rate despite treatment,2 especially patients aged <5 or >40 – can be 20%.3
Tetanus – wounds contaminated with soil or animal manure. High fever, muscle spasms and lockjaw.
Bacterial infection (Clostridium tetani). Complications: PE, pneumonia. Mortality rate 11%.3
Pertussis – whooping cough. Bordetella pertussis. Persistent cough with secretions in airways, distinctive
‘whoop’ at end of cough. Complications: pneumonia, seizures, encephalopathy, apnoea. In infants <12
months, half need treatment in hospital.3
Polio – viral infection, ofen asymptomatic but can cause paralysis, which is life threatening. Tere is no cure.
Although most cases pass without being noted, 1 in 200 with the condition have some degree of paralysis,3
muscle atrophy, joint contractures and bony deformity such as twisted legs.
Haemophilus infuenzae B – potentially serious bacterial infection. Can cause epiglottitis, meningitis, per-
icarditis, pneumonia, septicaemia, septic arthritis, cellulitis and osteomyelitis. Most serious complication
is meningitis.3
Pneumococcal – bacterial. PCV protects against 13 types of Streptococcus pneumoniae. Typically causes
respiratory tract infection (bronchitis, sinusitis) and otitis media but can cause invasive infection such as
pneumonia, meningitis and septicaemia.
Rotavirus – virus causing gastroenteritis. Although rarely fatal, 1 in 10 cases in infants cause dehydration
that requires hospitalisation – 18,000 infant hospital admissions in England and Wales each year.4
Meningitis B, ACWY – protection against meningococcal groups B, A, C, W and Y. Causes meningitis and
septicaemia. Complications include hearing damage, epilepsy, brain damage, limb amputation and death.
Group W is most aggressive form. Symptoms: fever, headache, vomiting, muscle pains, cold hands and feet,
non-blanching rash (petechial or purpuric).
➠ 452
Population Health

-- 467 of 575 --

➠ 453	
Extra Notes 	Cervical Screening Programme1–5
Overview of Cervical Screening Programme
All women* between 25 and 64 years
• 	25–49 years have 3-yearly recall.
• 	50–64 years have 5-yearly recall.
• 	Over 65 years are entitled to screening if they haven’t been screened since they turned 50 years or if they
have had recent abnormal results requiring follow-up.
Should screening be offered to younger women?
• 	In all four countries of the UK, screening starts at 25 years. Tis is because:
• 	Younger women are more likely to have abnormal cytology.
• 	Te abnormal cells are more likely to return to normal by themselves in younger women, making
the development of cancer less likely.
• 	Terefore, if the screening age was brought down this would likely result in an increase in unneces-
sary invasive tests/biopsies, i.e. would lead to more harm than beneft.
Who doesn’t need cervical screening?
• 	Women with symptoms of cervical cancer should be referred directly via the suspected cancer pathway:
cervical cytology should not be done (it is a screening test not a diagnostic test).
• 	Unless under active follow-up for a previous abnormal result, pregnant women should wait until 3
months afer delivery before having their routine cervical screening test.
• 	Women who have never been sexually active are at very low risk of cervical cancer so can choose not to
be screened.
• 	Women who have had a total hysterectomy (i.e. cervix removed) do not require screening. However, in
certain situations ‘vault smears’ are done – if this is required the patient’s gynaecologist should arrange it.
*‘Women’ includes people with a cervix including trans men and non-binary people assigned female
at birth.
Population Health

-- 468 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Other NHS Screening Programmes1,2
What 	Who 	Comment
Bowel
cancer
60–74 years old
Plan to extend programme to
>50s
FIT testing. Positive results referred for colonoscopy
Tested every 2 years
Information from https://www.gov.uk/guidance/bowel-cancer-screening-programme-overview
(updated March 2021)
Breast
cancer
Women* 50–71
(Plan to extend to 47–73 years)
3 yearly mammography
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/breast-screening-programme-overview (updated March 2021)
Diabetic
retinopathy
Annually (>12 years of age with
diabetes)
Digital retinal photography
Information from https://www.gov.uk/guidance/diabetic-eye-screening-programme-overview
(updated May 2021)
Abdominal
aortic
aneurysm
Men** aged 65 years
Information from https://www.gov.uk/guidance/abdominal-aortic-aneurysm-screening-
programme-overview (updated March 2021)
Newborn /
infant
All newborns (hearing,
bloodspot, physical examination)
Blood spot tests for: sickle cell, cystic fbrosis,
hypothyroidism + six metabolic disorders (phenylketonuria,
MCADD, maple syrup urine disease, isovaleric acidaemia,
glutaric aciduria type 1 and HCU)
Information from https://www.gov.uk/guidance/newborn-blood-spot-screening-programme-
overview (updated November 2018)
Pregnancy 	Pregnant women (fetal anomaly,
infectious diseases, sickle cell/
thalassaemia)
Examination – height, weight, fundal height, urine dip, BP
Blood tests – blood-borne viruses, anaemia, blood group,
rhesus status, sickle cell, thalassaemia
Scans – dating 8–14 weeks, anomaly 18–21 weeks
Down screening – bloods 10–14 weeks. Best test is
combined test (β-hCG, PAPP-A and nuchal translucency)
Cut off for further investigation is 1 in 150. Also Edwards’
syndrome and Patau’s syndrome now screened for 2
Non-invasive pre-natal testing for Down syndrome is
available – currently private. Based on maternal blood
sample, tested for fetal DNA. Said to be 99% accurate in
detecting Down, Edwards’ and Patau’s syndromes
Information from
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/infectious-diseases-in-pregnancy-screening-programme-
overview (updated June 2020)
https://www.nhsinform.scot/healthy-living/screening/pregnancy/non-invasive-prenatal-
testing-nipt
*‘Women’ includes trans men and non-binary people assigned female at birth who have not had an operation
to remove their breasts and trans women and non-binary people assigned male at birth and who have taken
feminising hormones.
• 	If registered with a GP as female, will automatically be called for screening.
• 	If registered with a GP as male, will not automatically be called for screening and should organise mam-
mogram through GP or by booking appointment with screening service.
** ‘Men’ includes trans women and non-binary people assigned male at birth.
➠ 454
Population Health

-- 469 of 575 --

➠ 455	
Extra Notes 	Diet and Exercise Advice
Information from NICE guideline CG181. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including
lipid modifcation. September 2016.
Cardioprotective diet recommendations1
Total fat intake <30% daily intake.
Saturated fats <7% daily intake.
Reduce/replace animal or saturated fats with monounsaturated or polyunsaturated fats.
Olive oil and rapeseed oils or spreads based on these oils are healthy substitutes.
Reduce intake of sugar and products containing refned sugars such as fructose.
Choose wholegrain varieties of starchy food.
‘Eat at least fve portions of fruit or vegetables a day’ (however, fruit may be high in sugar).
Fish at least twice a week (one portion of oily fsh). Pregnant women should limit oily fsh to two portions
and avoid marlin, swordfsh and shark.
‘Eat at least four to fve portions of unsalted nuts, seeds and legumes per week.’
Exercise recommendations
‘At least 150 minutes of moderate intensity aerobic activity or… 75 minutes of vigorous intensity aerobic
activity’ a week.
‘Muscle-strengthening activities on 2 or more days a week that work all major muscle groups.’
Encourage patients with a comorbidity, medical condition or personal circumstances to ‘exercise at their
maximum safe capacity.’
Alcohol consumption: Department of Health, January 20162
Recommends maximum limit of 14 units per week for both men and women. Tose 14 units should be
spread over 3 or more days.
Population Health

-- 470 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Statins1,2
Information from NICE guideline CG181. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including
lipid modifcation. September 2016.
Secondary prevention 	80 mg atorvastatin and repeat lipid profle 3 months later. Lower dose if potential
drug interactions, high risk of adverse efects or patient preference. Do not delay
managing modifable risk factors, do not delay if acute coronary syndrome.
Primary prevention 	Ofer lifestyle changes and retesting
Ofer 20 mg atorvastatin if: ≥10% 10-year risk of developing CVD.
>85 years (but be aware of factors that might make Rx inappropriate)
CKD
Consider in all T1DMs and ofer if either:
>10 years of DM
>40 years
Established nephropathy
Other CVD risk factors
Type 2 diabetes and ≥10% 10-year risk of developing CVD
Advise of risks and adverse efects – an example explanation: ‘Side efects include muscle pain or weakness,
stomach problems or pain, and statins can afect the function of the liver. Rarely, they can cause muscle
breakdown. (See BNF for full list.) If muscle pain or weakness develops seek help. Attend for another blood
test to check the liver at 3 and 12 months. Avoid grapefruit juice when taking statins.’ Check no pre-existing
generalised muscle pain and check CK level if present before starting. Remember to change simvastatin to
atorvastatin if on amlodipine.
Measure liver transaminase enzymes at ‘baseline, 3/12 months… 12 months, but not again unless clinically
indicated’.1
Follow-up for both primary and secondary prevention includes a lipid retest afer 3/12. If >40% reduction
(non-HDL) is not achieved discuss compliance, timing, diet, lifestyle. Consider increasing dose if started on
<80 mg and at higher risk due to risk score, comorbidities or using clinical judgement. Annual medication
review to discuss compliance, lifestyle and address CV risk factors. ‘Consider annual non-fasting non-HDL
cholesterol to inform discussion.’1
If eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 discuss with a renal specialist frst.
If intolerance of statins, treat with maximum tolerated dose. Consider stop/restart, ‘reducing the dose… or
changing the statin to a lower intensity group.’1 If there is muscle pain or weakness, check the CK.
Triglycerides
>20 mmol/L 	Refer urgently if not secondary to alcohol or poor glycaemic control.1
10–20 mmol/L 	Repeat day 5–14 (fasting sample) then refer afer considering secondary causes if remains
≥10 mmol/L.1
4.5–9.9 mmol/L CVD risk may be underestimated by risk assessment tools. Optimise CV health and seek
advice if non-HDL cholesterol >7.5 mmol/L.1
Ezetimibe monotherapy may be used in primary hypercholesterolaemia if the patient is intolerant of statins
or if drug interactions prevent the use of statins.2
Seek specialist advice before considering fenofbrates (e.g. for hypertriglyceridemia).
➠ 456
 
Lipid management
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for a link to helpful information about lipid
management.
Population Health

-- 471 of 575 --

CHAPTER 19 OVERVIEW
Respiratory Health
➠ 457
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Respiratory Health
Learning points in this chapter
include:
1 	Pneumonia 	‘Lower respiratory tract infections’
‘Diseases scoring tools, e.g. CURB for
community-acquired pneumonia’
Management of pneumonia
CRB-65 score and AMTS
2 	Acute Asthma 	‘Common and important conditions – asthma:
acute and chronic’
‘Specifc procedures such as PEFR’
Acute asthma management
3 	COPD 	‘Common and important conditions – COPD’
‘Local and national guidelines to manage…
COPD’
‘The importance of lifestyle changes,
particularly smoking cessation and
pulmonary rehabilitation’
Management of COPD
4 	Snoring 	‘Snoring and sleep apnoea’
‘CPAP for sleep apnoea’
Risk factors, assessment and
management of OSAS/OSAHS
5 	Lung Cancer 	‘Respiratory malignancies’
‘Indications for chest X-rays, CT and MRI
scans’
Causes of coin lesions
Lung cancer 2WW referral
criteria
Extra
Notes
Spirometry 	‘Primary care investigations such as …
spirometry’
‘Interpretation of spirometry results’
Spirometry
Reversibility testing
Restrictive lung disease

-- 472 of 575 --

CHAPTER 19 REFERENCES
Pneumonia
1. 	NICE CKS. Chest infections – adult. https://cks.nice.org.uk/chest-infections-adult#!scenario:1. Jun 2021.
2. 	BMJ Best Practice – Community-acquired pneumonia. https://bestpractice.bmj.com/topics/en-gb/3000108/
management-recommendations
3. 	Lim W.S., van der Eerden M.M., Laing R. et al. Defning community-acquired pneumonia severity on presentation
to hospital: an international derivation and validation study. Torax 2003; 58: 377–82.
4. 	Hodkinson H.M. Evaluation of a mental test score for assessment of mental impairment in the elderly. Age Ageing
1972; 1: 233–8.
Acute Asthma and Acute COPD
1. 	BTS/Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). British guideline on the management of asthma. https://
www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/quality-improvement/guidelines/asthma/. Jul 2019.
2. 	NICE CKS. Asthma (Acute asthma section). https://cks.nice.org.uk/topics/asthma/management/acute-exacerba-
tion-of-asthma/. May 2021.
3. 	NICE CKS. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. https://cks.nice.org.uk/chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-dis-
ease#!scenario:1. Jul 2021.
COPD
1. 	2020 GOLD Report (2020 Global strategy for prevention, diagnosis and management of COPD). https://goldcopd.
org/gold-reports/
2. 	NICE CKS. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. https://cks.nice.org.uk/chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-dis-
ease#!scenario. Jul 2021.
Snoring and OSAHS
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/obstructive-sleep-apnoea-syndrome-pro. Jul 2020.
2. 	http://www.britishsnoring.co.uk/sleep_apnoea/epworth_sleepiness_scale.php
3. 	https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/assessing-fitness-to-drive-a-guide-for-medical-professionals.
Contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence v3.0.
Useful Resource
Tiredness can kill. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/503534/
INF159_150216.pdf. Contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence v3.0.
Lung Cancer
1. 	NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
2. 	https://radiopaedia.org/articles/coin-lesion-lung?lang=gb
3. 	NICE CKS. https://cks.nice.org.uk/lung-and-pleural-cancers-recognition-and-referral#!scenario. Feb 2021.
Spirometry
1. 	https://www.blf.org.uk/support-for-you/breathing-tests/spirometry-and-reversibility
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 458
Respiratory Health

-- 473 of 575 --

➠ 459
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Lionel Morgan 	82 years 	M
PMH 	Parkinson’s disease
Medications 	Sinemet
Entacapone
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Medication review 3 months ago. No concerns.
Investigations 	No information
Household 	Betty Morgan 	80 years 	F
Wife Betty also present and talks on the phone.

-- 474 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Pneumonia
Open ☐ 	A chest infection? Anything else you have noticed? How do you feel about your health
generally?
Flags ☐ 	Are you feeling SOB? Have you had a fever? Do you have any pain? What colour are you
spitting out? Any blood? Any cold or sore throat at the moment?
Risk ☐ 	Are you managing to swallow food and tablets without coughing? Do you smoke? Have
you sufered with lung trouble in the past? Have you been exposed to asbestos?
History ☐ 	I see you take Sinemet and entacapone for your Parkinson’s; is there any other medical
history? Is it just the two of you at home?
ICE ☐ 	Any other concerns? Is there anything specifc you were hoping I would do today?
Impact ☐ 	I’m interested to know how your Parkinson’s is afecting you at the moment. How does it
impact on your day? Since this cough, have either of you noticed any other changes?
Sense ☐ 	Lionel, you have asked Betty to answer for you a few times, are you feeling slightly muddled?
Curious ☐ 	Are you or your family worried about your memory?
O/E ☐ 	Can I test your memory by asking a few questions (AMTS). Would you normally be able
to answer these questions more easily? Betty, please can you check Lionel’s temperature for
me? Does he look as if he is breathing quicker than usual?
SummarICE ☐ 	So, for 4 days you have been struggling with your breathing and coughing up green phlegm,
felt feverish and slightly more muddled than usual. You are both concerned this could be
an infection.
Impression ☐ 	I think you could have pneumonia, Lionel.
Experience ☐ 	Pneumonia is an infection of the air sacs in the lungs which is usually signifcant enough
to show up on a chest X-ray.
Explanation ☐ I think this is the case as you have been coughing up green phlegm, you have a fever and
are more breathless and muddled than normal.
InCludE ☐ 	I appreciate you said you are well cared for at home and prefer not to go to hospital but I
think it may be necessary.
Recommend ☐ When someone has a fever and confusion, we usually ask the hospital doctors to see them.
Te other option is I could see you in the surgery to examine you. By listening to your chest,
checking your BP, heart rate and oxygen levels it will be clearer just how much this infection
is afecting you. If your numbers seem okay, we could consider giving you antibiotics at
home and keep a very close eye on you over the next couple of days. However, I suspect
my recommendation will still be to go to hospital for some oxygen and antibiotics into the
blood to speed up your recovery.
Empower ☐ 	What do you both think? Lionel and Betty, it sounds as if the two of you are looking afer
each other very well; however, should you need any help with carers then please let me
know.
Specifcs ☐ 	How quickly can you get to the surgery? Great, I will see you shortly. When you are feeling
better, let’s have another chat about your memory and Parkinson’s in more detail: if you
could please book an appointment in about 2 weeks and I will see you then. Betty, it would
be helpful to talk to you too about how you feel things are going. Perhaps you could book
a separate appointment for yourself.
Safety net ☐ 	If, en route, you have pain or feel more short of breath or feel more poorly, please stop the
car and call 999 for an ambulance.
➠ 460
Respiratory Health – 1

-- 475 of 575 --

➠ 461	
Patient’s Story 	Pneumonia
Doctor’s notes 	Lionel Morgan, 82 years. PMH: Parkinson’s disease. Medications: Sinemet and
entacapone.
Wife Betty also present.
How to act 	Betty, your wife is with you. You turn to ask your wife Betty for answers. Betty likes to
answer for you.
PC 	‘Doctor, I think I’ve got a chest infection.’
History 	Betty 	Lionel is more muddled than usual.
Lionel has been coughing green phlegm for 4 days.
He looks breathless but isn’t wheezy. He is not choking on his food.
No blood seen. No other viral URTI symptoms. His fever was 102 °F.
Lionel 	You have no pain. Your spit is green.
Social 	Lionel 	You live with your wife, Betty, who does all your ADL and takes care of your
medicines.
You are well looked afer at home and your three children live close by.
You have never smoked. You drink no alcohol. No asbestos exposure.
Your son is on his way over and would be able to take you to the surgery or
hospital.
ICE 	Lionel 	You worry you have a chest infection.
‘I would prefer you don’t send me into hospital.’
However, you will do as the doctor suggests – if they insist on calling an
ambulance accept this. If they ofer to see you in surgery, state you would
prefer this to see if there’s any chance of avoiding hospital.
Betty 	You wonder if this is pneumonia.
‘You will do as you are told, Lionel.’
Examination 	Bronchial breathing and crackles in the lef base. Temperature 38.2 °C. HR 90 bpm
regular. Sats 95%. RR 24. BP 120/68.
AMTS score 6/10.
If telephone – AMTS 6/10, sounds breathless. Betty able to tell you his temperature
is 102 °F.
Betty states he would usually answer memory questions more easily.
Respiratory Health – 1

-- 476 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Pneumonia
Pneumonia 	An infection of the lung parenchyma (alveoli).
Can be difcult to diferentiate acute bronchitis/LRTI and CAP. NICE states ‘clinical judgement must
always be used to diagnose CAP because no combination of symptoms or signs is clearly diagnostic’1
Calculate CRB-65 score 	Tis gentleman’s CRB-65 was 2.
1 point each for: confusion (AMTS ≤8/10), RR ≥30/min, systolic BP <90 or
diastolic ≤60, age ≥65 years.
Mortality risk from CRB-65 scores
Score = 0 	‘Low risk’2 	<1% mortality risk2,3
Score = 1–2 	‘Intermediate risk’2 	1–10% mortality risk2,3
Score = 3–4 	‘High risk’2 	>10% mortality risk2,3
Sputum culture 	‘Do not routinely recommend microbiological tests for people with low-severity
community-acquired pneumonia.’1
CRP testing 	Consider if clinically a diagnosis of pneumonia is not clear or uncertainty about
whether antibiotics are indicated.1
<20 mg/L 	‘Do not routinely ofer antibiotic therapy.’1
20 mg/L–100 mg/L 	‘Consider a delayed antibiotic prescription.’1
>100 mg/L 	‘Ofer antibiotic therapy.’1
NB: A fever is 100 °F (= 37.8 °C). Many older patients still use Fahrenheit.
AMTS:4 to save time, ask the hard questions frst, once they have got >2 wrong then move on.
Address to remember (42 West Street), age, time, year, where are we, 2 persons, DOB, queen, First World
War, 20–1 backwards, ?recall address correct.
Treatment of pneumonia
Score = 0 	5 days antibiotics. See your local guidance. E.g. Amoxicillin 500 mg TDS or doxycycline
200 mg day 1 then 100 mg daily or clarithromycin 500 mg BD (erythromycin in pregnancy
if penicillin allergy).
Score = 1–2 	Consider hospital admission, particularly if score 2. 5 days amoxicillin + 5 days clarithro-
mycin (erythromycin if pregnant). If penicillin allergy, doxycycline or clarithromycin alone.
Score = 3–4 	Admit urgently to hospital.1
Recovery
Useful to explain to patients that the recovery can take a long time. Fever usually resolves within 1 week,
chest pain and sputum should settle by 4 weeks, cough and breathlessness by 6 weeks, fatigue by 3 months,
full resolution by 6 months.1
Safety net
See your GP if no response within 3 days and sooner if worsening symptoms.
Practising holistically
In this scenario, asking about swallowing demonstrates you have considered the chronic comorbidities in
this acute situation and thought about aspiration pneumonia.
When a carer is present, acknowledge them and their role.
If there is no time to discuss the impact of a chronic disease (Parkinson’s) in this frst consultation then
signpost that you will do so later.
➠ 462
Respiratory Health – 1

-- 477 of 575 --

➠ 463
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Daisy Fitton 	24 years 	F
PMH 	Asthma
Medications 	Clenil 100 2 pufs BD
Salbutamol PRN
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Last attended 9 months ago for asthma review with nurse. Peak
fow 450 L/min.
Investigations 	No information
Household 	No household members registered

-- 478 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Acute Asthma
Open ☐ 	Oh dear, tell me more. What else have you noticed?
Flags ☐ 	How ofen have you been using your blue inhaler? With a spacer? How ofen do you usually
use the blue one? What about the brown one?
Risk ☐ 	Have you ever been admitted with your asthma? Have you ever been in intensive care? Do
you smoke? Has your asthma ever been as bad as this? Do you have a personalised asthma
action plan?
History ☐ 	I understand that you are otherwise well, and taking no medicines, is that correct? Is there
anyone at home with you?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think has caused this? From your experience of your asthma, what do you
believe is necessary?
Sense ☐ 	I can see you are struggling.
O/E ☐ 	May I examine you, listen to your chest, check your pulse and oxygen levels and your
temperature and do the blowing peak fow test? May I ask you to take of your top: is that
okay?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have had a cold and sore throat and now you are struggling with your
asthma despite regular use of your blue inhaler. You think this may have been caused by
the weather and that you may need antibiotics and steroids.
Impression ☐ 	Your peak fow blowing test and your breathing and heart rate suggest this is a severe asthma
attack.
Explanation ☐ Tere is no sign of a pocket of bacteria in the lung. You have not had a fever.
InCludE 	I think this has been caused by a viral infection. You are not coughing green phlegm and
your sore throat and cold are typical of a virus so, although I agree that steroids will help,
I don’t think that antibiotics will be of any use.
Empathy ☐ 	Normally, you have been able to manage the asthma at home so it is frightening when your
asthma is so much worse than usual.
Recommend ☐ May I give you a nebuliser and then see how you respond? I will also give you 40 mg of
prednisolone, a steroid. I will ask the nurse to give you a nebuliser in the treatment room
and I will see you again in 10 minutes. Let’s see how your chest responds to that and make
a decision then about whether you need to go to hospital. What are your thoughts about
that? I would want you to be able to manage at least an hour without the inhaler, and then
4-hourly at home. Hopefully, you will respond to treatment and will be able to go home.
Specifcs ☐ 	If that is the case, I will see you again in 2 days’ time to check you are getting on okay. I will
book you an appointment for 9 a.m. if that is convenient.
Future ☐ 	When you are feeling better, I’d like to meet up again to optimise your inhalers. In future,
if you are using your blue inhaler more than twice a week this suggests we need to increase
the preventer, the brown inhaler. We can write all this down for you in your own asthma
plan.
Safety net ☐ 	If you feel your breathing is deteriorating in the treatment room, please tell us and we’ll call
an ambulance.
➠ 464
Respiratory Health – 2

-- 479 of 575 --

➠ 465	
Patient’s Story 	Acute Asthma
Doctor’s notes Daisy Fitton, 24 years. PMH: asthma. Medications: Clenil 100 2 pufs BD, salbutamol PRN.
How to act 	A little distracted by your breathing.
PC 	‘My asthma isn’t very good.’
History 	You’ve had a cold and sore throat and for the past 2 days you’ve become wheezy.
You are not coughing any phlegm and have no pain but feel tight in the chest. No fever.
Your chest always feels like this at this time of year.
You were admitted once as a child but no ITU admissions.
You use the Clenil BD and usually your salbutamol 6 times a week, especially afer hockey.
You have a peak fow meter but don’t use it very ofen.
You last took four pufs of salbutamol 1 hour ago.
Social 	You are a solicitor. You live with your boyfriend. You have never smoked. All is well.
ICE 	You believe the weather has caused this exacerbation. You are not too concerned.
You expect the doctor will give you steroids and antibiotics – if the doctor suggests you don’t
need antibiotics, question them about why – you usually get given them.
You will follow the doctor’s advice regarding admission, stating: ‘You are the doctor.’
Examination 	Peak fow 210 L/min. RR 24 Sats 95%. HR 104 bpm. Temperature 36.9 °C.
Good air entry, R = L. Vesicular breaths and wheeze throughout, expiration > inspiration.
Respiratory Health – 2

-- 480 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Acute Asthma and Acute COPD
Life-threatening asthma
Peak fow <33% or asthma with the following features: Sats <92%, silent chest, cyanosis, poor respiratory
efort, arrhythmia, hypotension, confusion or exhaustion.1
Acute severe asthma
Peak fow 33–50%, RR ≥25, HR ≥110 bpm in people >12 years and not able to complete sentences (no
features of life-threatening asthma).1
Moderate asthma
Peak fow 50–75%, normal speech and no signs of acute severe/life-threatening asthma.1
Management of acute asthma – adults
All: oxygen to keep the saturations between 94 and 98%.1
Prednisolone 40–50 mg stat then daily to complete minimum of 5 days.1
Follow up patients at home within 2 working days.
Life-threatening asthma: admit the patient immediately. Call 999. Give salbutamol 5 mg + 0.5 mg ipratro-
pium nebuliser. May repeat salbutamol if required whilst waiting for the ambulance.
Severe asthma: consider admission. Give 5 mg salbutamol via nebuliser or spacer if nebuliser not available.
If not response or still has features of acute severe asthma, admit.1
Moderate asthma: give up to 10 pufs (1 every 60 s) of salbutamol via spacer, if no response give nebulised
salbutamol, consider admission. If good response, continue or increase usual treatment and continue pred-
nisolone for minimum of 5 days. NICE suggest can quadruple inhaled corticosteroid treatments in some
patients to reduce oral steroid use.2
In a CSA exam situation, if the actor is really struggling to answer your questions, advise a nebuliser +/–
phone ambulance early in the consultation. It is kinder to the patient to ask them more questions afer their
breathing feels better. You can always indicate to the examiner that you know you require more information
by stating that you will need to ask some more questions once their breathing has improved.
Safety netting
On discharge. If requiring more than 10 pufs of salbutamol through a spacer within 4 hours, they will then
need to see a doctor again or go to hospital. Arrange follow-up within 2 days, e.g. F2F or telephone call.
Acute COPD3
Consider admission if severe breathlessness, inability to cope at home/lives alone, poor or deteriorating
general condition, rapid onset, acute confusion/impaired consciousness, cyanosis, saturations <90%,
worsening peripheral oedema, new arrhythmia, already on LTOT, failure to respond to initial treatment or
changes on CXR. Give supplemental oxygen whilst awaiting emergency transfer aiming for saturations of
88–92%.3 Provide oxygen through a Venturi 24% mask at 2–3 L/min or Venturi 28% mask at 4 L/min or via
nasal cannula at 1–2 L/min if Venturi mask unavailable.
Where admission not required treat increased cough and/or breathlessness with 30 mg prednisolone, once
daily for 5 days. Discuss adverse efects of long-term treatment and consider osteoporosis prophylaxis if
>3 or 4 courses of steroids per year. Treat change in colour or increased volume of sputum with antibiotics
(e.g. amoxicillin, doxycycline or clarithromycin).
➠ 466
Respiratory Health – 2

-- 481 of 575 --

➠ 467
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Chao Lin 	82 years 	M
PMH 	COPD
Current smoker
Medications 	Salbutamol
Tiotropium
Allergies
Consultations
No known drug allergies
COPD review 1 year ago with the nurse – no changes made. Using
salbutamol on hills. Tiotropium daily. Saturations 96%. MRC
dyspnoea scale: 2.
Weight 72 kg.
Spirometry 1 year ago.
FEV1 48%, FVC 80%, FEV1/FVC 0.6
FEV1 following salbutamol 50%.
Letter to patient
‘Dear Mr Lin. Please make an appointment to speak to me at the surgery. I would
like to discuss your breathing and inhalers to see if any adjustments are required and
take this opportunity to discuss your general health and if there is anything that you
may need. Best wishes. Dr Blount.’
Flu and pneumococcal vaccines up to date.
Investigations 	No information
Household 	No known household contacts

-- 482 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	COPD
Open ☐ 	Tank you for calling Mr Lin. How are you? Tis is the frst time we have spoken so please tell
me about your health. What is most difcult? What has changed?
ICE ☐ 	Is there anything you wanted to talk to me about? Has anything been on your mind or worrying
you? What is your biggest fear? Did you have any thoughts about what we may talk about today?
Sense ☐ 	I noticed when you frst answered the phone your breathing was harder but seems to have eased
now. Have you been struggling with your breathing whilst moving around?
Impact ☐ 	What are you not able to do? How long can you walk for? Do you have stairs in your home? Do
you do your meals and shopping? Are you able to keep the home clean?
History ☐ 	Apart from your breathing, have you had any other medical conditions in the past? Or other
parts of your body which don’t work as they used to? Tell me more about your breathing. When
do you take your inhalers? Every day? Do you use a spacer with your blue inhaler? Any allergies?
Who else is important to you in your life? I’m sorry, that must still be very painful. How are you
managing on your own? How ofen do you see your son? What did you do at work?
Risk ☐ 	Did that involve exposure to asbestos? Are you still smoking? Growing up, were you exposed to
much pollution or smoke? Did your family in China have any health problems?
Flags ☐ 	Do you cough up any phlegm or blood? Do you ever have any chest pain? Do you feel breathless
at night? How many pillows do you use? Do your legs swell up? Have you lost or put on any
weight? When did you last have a chest infection? You seem concerned about infections.
Curious ☐ 	Why might that be? How is your mood? Do you feel isolated? Or depressed? Do you ever want
to not wake up? Do you have a faith? With your faith is there anything important to you that I
should know about now or in the future?
SummarICE ☐ 	Mr Lin, you have noticed that, for the past 6 months, you struggle to walk as far as before without
having a rest. You worry about getting a chest infection and also how your breathing may change
over time. You fear dying and struggling to breathe. You have also been worried about asbestos
and whether this could have damaged your lungs as well.
Impression ☐ 	I’m afraid your airway disease does seem to have worsened.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about the term COPD? Or chronic airways disease?
Explanation ☐ 	It is a long-term condition of the airways which have been damaged over time. Smoking is the
usual cause, but you’re right that asbestos can afect the lungs too.
Empathy ☐ 	I can imagine it is frightening to notice that your breathing does not allow you to do what you
used to, and fear that soon you will not be able to reach the shops.
Recommend ☐ Tere are things we can try which should help. I would like to swap your capsule inhaler for a
stronger one. I suggest an inhaler called Anoro Ellipta. It contains a medicine like your capsule
inhaler but also a long-acting version of your blue inhaler. You may also fnd a spacer helps you
take your blue inhaler. I will ask our pharmacist to demonstrate the new inhaler and spacer.
InCludE ☐ 	It’s not easy to know if the asbestos has contributed, but let’s do a CXR to look for signs.
Empower ☐ 	Are you interested in our stop smoking service? Stopping can help to slow the disease and
make the biggest diference in the long term. I could refer you to our rehab service which aims
to get your lungs working as well as possible? We ofen give patients with COPD rescue packs
containing antibiotics and steroids to start should you become unwell. You take prednisolone
30 mg daily (steroid) if your breathing gets worse, with amoxicillin (antibiotic) if you get more
phlegm or it changes colour. Would it be reassuring to have these medications at home? How
do these options sound?
Future ☐ 	Can we talk again in 1 month to talk about what might happen to your breathing over time?
We could create a care plan where we talk through diferent scenarios and what you might like
doctors to do. I’d also like to talk more about how you are generally.
Specifcs ☐ 	I will also ask our COPD nurse to see you, to check you are getting on well with the new
inhaler, in about 6 weeks. I will also request a CXR for you as your breathing has deterio-
rated and you’re worried about asbestos.
Safety net ☐ 	If you are more breathless, in pain or unsure please speak to a doctor straight away.
➠ 468
Respiratory Health – 3

-- 483 of 575 --

➠ 469	
Patient’s Story 	COPD
Doctor’s notes Chao Lin, 82 years. PMH: COPD. Medications: salbutamol and tiotropium. Smoker.
Consultations: 1 year ago, COPD review with PN. Sats 96%. MRC 2. Letter to patient:
COPD review now due.
How to act 	Breathing initially fast but this settles afer a short while.
PC 	‘Hello, Doctor. I had a letter asking me to call for a check-up.’
History 	You don’t like to bother the doctor. Apart from your breathing you are well and you have
no signifcant PMH. You are compliant with your tiotropium and use the salbutamol twice
daily. You have no allergies. You remember your grandparents were heavy breathers. You
never knew your father and your mother died when you were small. You believe you are
82 years old but don’t know exactly. Your breathing hasn’t been very good for the past 6
months. You started to wheeze about 3 years ago. You wheeze when walking to the shop
but you are okay in your home although occasionally wheeze afer a shower. You have no
orthopnoea and sleep on two thin pillows. You have no fuid collecting in the legs. You have
no cardiac symptoms. Where you grew up, your grandparents used to light fres throughout
the day to keep you warm. You had no siblings. You had three infections last winter and
once you were in hospital overnight. Tis was a frightening experience as you had never
been in hospital.
Social 	You moved to the UK when you were 36 years old and worked in the shipyards. You live
alone and fnd life tiring. You walk to the local shop a couple of hundred yards away and
stop for a rest midway. You use a shopping trolley to wheel your food back to the house but
this is getting harder. You do not drive. Your son owns the local garage in the next village
and he always ofers to help you and you see him twice a week. He takes you wherever you
need to go. You lost your wife to bowel cancer 3 years ago. You feel quite lonely but feel you
should not complain. Your mood is a little low but you have no thoughts of not wanting to
be alive and generally you feel grateful for life. Your faith (Buddhism) is important to you.
You continue to smoke and would like to stop. Te surgery is on the next street to your
home so convenient if needed. You have no problems within your bungalow.
ICE 	You worry about an infection or whether you will one day struggle with your breathing.
Is it likely you will die of not being able to breathe? You also worry about asbestos as you
have heard about old colleagues who have been afected by this from working on ship
repairs. You have no expectations from the consultation and would follow any advice that
the doctor gives. However, a preference would be to avoid any risk of infection if possible.
If the doctor can help reduce your worries about asbestos you would appreciate this.
Examination 	Chest – air entry and wheeze throughout. No accessory muscle use. Saturations 94%. HS
normal. HR 72 bpm regular. No leg oedema or raised JVP. Weight 72 kg. BP 130/70. Peak
fow 20 L/min. No supraclavicular lymphadenopathy. No clubbing.
Respiratory Health – 3

-- 484 of 575 --

Learning Points 	COPD
Advice below is based upon GOLD (Global Obstructive Lung Disease) Guidelines.1
Diagnosed using spirometry. Post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC <0.7. Exclude asthma/reversibility – see
reversibility in the Learning Points of Asthma Diagnosis (Chapter 2, Case 3). Why? – It is dangerous to
prescribe a LABA without a steroid in asthma.
Assessment of severity: mMRC dyspnoea score + CAT (COPD assessment test) + number of exacerbations
over last 12 months. Use to categorise as GOLD A, B, C or D group (see reference for grid).
• 	GOLD A – mMRC <2, CAT <10, 0–1 exacerbations (not leading to admission).
• 	GOLD B – mMRC ≥2, CAT ≥10, 0–1 exacerbations (not leading to admission).
• 	GOLD C – mMRC <2, CAT <10, ≥2 exacerbations or 1 leading to admission.
• 	GOLD D – mMRC ≥2, CAT ≥10, ≥2 exacerbations or 1 leading to admission.
Without exact scores to hand, roughly equates to – few symptoms and few exacerbations = A, few exacerba-
tions but symptomatic = B, exacerbations but minimal interval symptoms = C, symptomatic and frequent
exacerbations = D.
FEV1 – indicates severity of airfow limitation but doesn’t directly impact management.
Initial therapy 	Group A – PRN SABA. All other groups can start with LAMA or if symptomatic
LAMA/LABA. Steroids are associated with pneumonia risk so limit use. Generally
only Group D (i.e. symptomatic and frequent exacerbations) or if eosinophil count
>0.3 or if asthma/COPD overlap. Avoid if recurrent pneumonia episodes. NB: some
evidence to suggest beneft from starting LABA/LAMA if SABA PRN insufcient,
so many areas have adopted this as frst-line treatment. Tis approach is supported
by NICE.2
Pulmonary rehab 	Ofer if mMRC ≥3 or recent hospitalisation.2
Home oxygen 	Consider referral for LTOT if Sats <92% on air, cyanosis, polycythaemia, peripheral
oedema, raised JVP, severe or very severe airfow obstruction.2
Health promotion 	Smoking cessation. Flu and pneumococcal vaccine.
Carer support 	Involve the carer in the management plan.
Self-management plan For exacerbations – when to step up inhalers and take rescue medications.
Example inhalers (refer to own local formulary)
Te patient should receive an explanation of how to use their inhaler. Following this, prescribe the same
brand:
• 	SABA – salbutamol. Good practice to prescribe a spacer device as well.
• 	LAMA – Incruse Ellipta, Seebri Breezhaler.
• 	LAMA/LABA – Anoro Ellipta, Ultibro Breezhaler, Duaklir Genuair ofen frst line afer SABA.
• 	ICS/LAMA – Relvar Ellipta, Fostair 100/6.
• 	ICA/LABA/LAMA – Trelegy Ellipta, Trimbow (MDI – prescribe with spacer, good for those who struggle
with poor inspiratory efort or difculty using inhalers).
➠ 470
Respiratory Health – 3

-- 485 of 575 --

➠ 471
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Brian West 	49 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Obesity
Medications 	Ramipril 7.5 mg OD
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No information
Investigations 	No information
Household 	Patricia West 	47 years 	F

-- 486 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Snoring
Open ☐ 	Oh dear, what has she told you about the snoring?
ICE ☐ 	What are your thoughts about the snoring? Does it worry you in any way? Any thoughts
on how I could help?
History ☐ 	Is this something you have struggled with for a while? How do you feel in the daytime?
What do you do for a living? So it’s really important for you to be wide awake at work.
Impact ☐ 	Have you noticed tiredness or poor concentration? Have you ever nodded of unexpectedly
in the day? Has the snoring afected your relationship with your wife?
Curious ☐ 	How do you think this tiredness might cause problems at work?
Flags ☐ 	Have you ever nodded of whilst driving? Any near misses in the car or lorry? Have you
sufered any nosebleeds? Blocked nose? Change in your voice? Breathlessness? Or cough?
Risk ☐ 	I can see from your records that you have a history of high blood pressure and struggle
with your weight. Do you have any other health problems? Do you smoke? Do you drink
alcohol? How ofen do you drink alcohol? Have you noticed if this afects the snoring?
Experience ☐ 	Have you known anyone with snoring or breathing problems at night before?
Sense ☐ 	I sense you aren’t particularly worried about the snoring but are worried about being able
to continue working, is that right?
O/E ☐ 	Have you weighed yourself or checked your BP recently? Which shirt collar size do you wear?
SummarICE ☐ 	So you have always been a ‘snorer’ but it has gradually become worse and is now impacting
your wife’s sleep. She has noticed that you hold your breath at night and then can gasp. You
have been feeling a lot more tired during the day and even nodded of in a meeting which is
unlike you. You aren’t worried about the snoring but need to keep earning for your family.
Impression ☐ 	I think you may have a condition where your breathing stops and starts whilst you are asleep
called obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome.
Explanation ☐ In some people their airway becomes foppy during deep sleep which causes the airway to
block. Your body then rouses you so your muscles wake up and you can breathe normally
again. Tis disrupted sleep can make you very tired in the day. OSAS is more common in
men who are carrying extra weight and can be made worse by drinking alcohol.
InCludE ☐ 	As you were thinking this was simple snoring, this must be a shock. I understand you’re
worried about how this will impact your job when you enjoy it so much and need the money.
Recommend ☐ May I text you a questionnaire called Te Epworth Sleepiness Questionnaire? Please com-
plete this honestly as it’s really important. I suspect I may need to refer you to a sleep clinic
to be diagnosed formally. Tey can measure your sleep and oxygen levels overnight. In the
meantime, I must advise you to stop driving. Tis is the last thing you want to hear, but
road trafc accidents are common in people with untreated OSAS. Of course, we need you
and other people to be safe. I can refer you to the clinic urgently so you can be assessed
and treated quickly. Would a ft note for your employer be helpful? Could I arrange some
blood tests to check your cholesterol and for diabetes? What do you think?
Empower ☐ 	Tere are things you can do to help yourself. Losing some weight will make your neck
lighter and help prevent the airways collapsing whilst you sleep. Also avoiding alcohol
in the evenings will help. Can you think of ways you could improve your diet or increase
exercise? Perhaps, longer term, could you take healthier foods with you when driving?
Future ☐ 	Please could I see you next week afer your bloods and with your completed questionnaire so
I can examine your throat and nose? We can then decide on the referral. If you have OSAS,
treatment is usually with a breathing machine you wear at night which keeps your airway
open. You should then get a more restful night’s sleep and be able to function normally in
the daytime.
Specifcs☐ 	I will ask reception to book you in for your bloods and with me next week.
Safety net ☐ 	If you notice any new symptoms or start to feel unwell please contact me straight away.
➠ 472
Respiratory Health – 4

-- 487 of 575 --

➠ 473	
Patient’s Story 	Snoring
Doctor’s notes Brian West, 49 years. PMH: hypertension, obesity. Medications: ramipril 7.5 mg OD.
How to act 	Relaxed
PC 	‘Hi Doc, the Mrs has told me to phone you. I keep waking her up with my snoring.’
History 	For several months your snoring has been disturbing your wife. You’ve always been prone
to snoring, particularly afer a drink, but it has become worse. Your wife says you can
make grunting noises and seem to hold your breath whilst asleep. You have been feeling
more tired during the day and fell asleep at a morning team briefng at work, much to your
boss’s annoyance. Your weight has been steadily climbing over the years. You don’t have
much time for exercise and have a sedentary job being a lorry driver. You rely heavily on
takeaway food and fast food from service stations whilst you are working. You work for a
big company and drive all over Europe. You enjoy your job and you are the bread winner
of the family so it is very important to you.
You don’t have any nasal obstruction or nose bleeds. You have not noticed any changes
to your voice. Your blood pressure has been reasonably well controlled recently, you have
your own machine: it was 134/78 last Sunday. No urinary symptoms. You are not aware of
waking in the night.
Social 	Married to wife Patricia for 29 years. Two grown-up children who live in London. You no
longer smoke, having quit 5 years ago. You enjoy drinking craf ales during the evenings of
your days of. You love your job as a long-distance lorry driver and rely on the income.
ICE 	You believe you are just a ‘snorer’ and wonder if you could get some nasal strips on the
NHS. You are a little concerned that your concentration has been poor recently and it’s not
like you to fall asleep in meetings. You expect a lecture about losing weight and stopping
drinking.
If the doctor mentions stopping driving become quite upset ‘It’s only snoring.’ Calm down
if the doctor explains the condition and what happens next.
Examination 	Neck circumference 44 cm. BMI 45. BP 143/87. ENT – NAD. Chest examination – NAD.
Collar size 45 cm. Last weight 144 kg about a month ago. Height 177 cm.
Respiratory Health – 4

-- 488 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Snoring /OSAHS
Terminology 	Obstructive Sleep Apnoea/Hypopnoea Syndrome (OSAHS) – irregular breathing at night
with collapsing of the upper airway resulting in interrupted sleep and excessive daytime
sleepiness, reduced concentration and alertness.1
OSAH – as above but without the daytime sleepiness/poor concentration.
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Syndrome (OSAS) – term used interchangeably with OSAHS.
Prevalence 	4% middle-aged men, 2% middle-aged women, 1–2% children (associated with obesity).
Risk factors 	Smoking 	Obesity 	Neck circumference > 43 cm 	Family history
Alcohol 	Male sex 	Hypothyroidism 	Acromegaly
Craniofacial abnormalities 	Sleeping supine 	Deviated septum
Children: Obesity, adenotonsillar hypertrophy, congenital conditions, e.g. Down,
Prader–Willi.
Complications Hypertension, stroke, road trafc accidents.
In children – behavioural problems, faltering growth in severe cases.
Symptoms 	Excessive daytime sleepiness, poor concentration, behavioural changes, unrefreshed from
sleep, snoring, pauses in breathing (noted by partner/parent), choking noises, nocturia.
Assessment 	Check red fags for alternative diagnoses (e.g. head and neck cancers), unilateral epistaxis,
severe nasal obstruction, hoarseness, dysphagia, rapid onset of symptoms without rapid
weight gain.
Epworth Sleepiness Questionnaire:2 >10 abnormal. 11–14 mild, 15–18 moderate,
>18 severe.
Examine: throat, nasal obstruction, BMI, neck circumference (collar size), BP,
chest – ?COPD/respiratory failure/cor pulmonale.
Management 	Lifestyle advice: reduce alcohol, stop smoking, weight loss if BMI raised, sleep on side,
advice to STOP DRIVING until have been assessed if sleepiness whilst driving. Group 2
licence (bus, lorry)/pilot – stop immediately.3
Cardiovascular disease assessment bloods, HbA1c. Regular BP checks.
Refer to sleep clinic:
• 	Urgent: sleepiness whilst driving or high-risk occupation, signs of respiratory or heart
failure, symptoms suggest coexisting severe OSAS + COPD.
• 	Routine: Snoring + Epworth sleepiness questionnaire score >10.
Refer children to ENT if adenotonsillar hypertrophy + snoring + symptoms OSA.
Treatment from secondary care is usually CPAP or intraoral devices.
➠ 474
Respiratory Health – 4

-- 489 of 575 --

➠ 475
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Doris Ripley 	76 years 	F
PMH 	COPD
Medications 	Anoro Ellipta OD
Salbutamol PRN
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	Chronic cough, sputum, sometimes containing streaks of blood.
Feeling more SOB. Diagnosis: IE-COPD. Management: Abx +
steroids, will arrange CXR due to haemoptysis.
Investigations 	Coin lesion right upper lobe, suggestive of malignancy. Forwarded
to lung MDT.
Household 	Peter Ripley 	78 years 	M

-- 490 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Lung Cancer
Open ☐ 	How can I help? Tat must be worrying, I’m sure together we can fnd the answers.
ICE ☐ 	What has been going through your mind? What is your biggest fear? Tere are clearly
questions which need answering but were you hoping for anything else today?
Explanation ☐ Unfortunately the CXR has shown something unexpected. Tere is a shadow on your right
lung. It is possible this is a patch of pneumonia but it could be something more serious.
To better understand the CXR, it would be helpful to know a little more about you and the
symptoms you have been having.
History ☐ 	Could tell me what led to the CXR being suggested? Can you tell me anything more about
the cough? Have you had any chest pain? Any fever or sweats? Do you feel short of breath?
Have you brought anything of your chest?
Flags ☐ 	Have you coughed up any blood? Have you noticed any weight loss?
Impact ☐ 	How has the cough been afecting you? Has it stopped you from doing anything?
Risk ☐ 	Do you smoke, or have you been a smoker in the past? Is there any family history of lung
problems? What did you used to do for a living?
Experience ☐ 	Have you known anyone with similar chest problems? Or an abnormal CXR?
Curious ☐ 	Tat must have been a difcult time, how is Peter now? Has he come with you today?
O/E ☐ 	Would it be possible for me to have a listen to your chest and check your heart, oxygen
levels and temperature?
SummarICE ☐ 	So you have had a cough for about 12 weeks. You initially thought it was your COPD playing
up but when you coughed up blood you were more worried. You are also concerned that
the usual antibiotics and steroids haven’t done the trick this time. You’ve noticed yourself
being more breathless and have experienced some weight loss. You’ve just had a CXR and
been told by the hospital you need to see a specialist. You’d like to know what this all means
and what the next steps are. Is there anything else?
Impression ☐ 	Unfortunately, you have some worrying symptoms which suggest the shadow on your lung
could be lung cancer. (Pause about 10 seconds).
Empathy ☐ 	I’m sorry, this must be a shock, what’s going through your mind?
Options ☐ 	Would you like to talk about what happens next? It’s good news that you have an appoint-
ment with the lung specialist so soon. Te sooner these things are investigated the better
the chance of successful treatment. When you see the specialist, they will likely arrange a
detailed scan of your body to get a better idea of the cause of the shadow. Tey may ofer
you a test to put a small fexible camera into your lung so a sample of any lump there can
be taken. If it did turn out to be lung cancer, possible treatment options are surgery, radio-
therapy or chemotherapy. What are your thoughts? I would like to arrange some blood
tests to help the lung specialist decide which scans and possible treatments would be best.
Is this okay?
Empower ☐ 	To help yourself, try to keep your strength up by eating regularly. Tere will be support
groups and information you could access should it turn out to be bad news.
Future ☐ 	I would really like to see you again afer your hospital appointment next week? Could I
book you an appointment here?
Specifcs ☐ 	Please make an appointment for blood tests at reception. I will see you again on Tuesday,
afer your appointment with the lung specialist. If you have any more questions or problems
please give me a call.
Safety net ☐ 	If you’re unable to make your appointment, start feeling more poorly, particularly with fever
or breathlessness, please call us straightaway.
➠ 476
Respiratory Health – 5

-- 491 of 575 --

➠ 477	
Patient’s Story 	Lung Cancer
Doctor’s notes Doris Ripley, 76 years. PMH: IE-COPD. Medication: Anoro Ellipta OD, salbutamol PRN.
Recent CXR results: coin lesion right upper lobe, suggestive of malignancy. Forwarded to
lung MDT.
How to act 	Upset. Push the doctor for the X-ray result. Be shocked if cancer is mentioned.
PC 	‘I’ve had a phone call from the hospital saying I need to see a specialist next week. What is
going on?’
History 	You visited the doctor 2 weeks ago with a cough which had been going on for 12 weeks.
Initially you thought it was just your COPD, so you ignored it. However, when you started
to notice blood in your spit you went to the doctor. Te doctor was nice and said it was
probably a chest infection, so you were given antibiotics and steroids, but wanted a CXR
to be on ‘the safe side’. You then received a phone call from the hospital stating your CXR
was abnormal and you had been booked into a ‘2-week wait’ appointment next week. You
don’t know what this means and are worried. You don’t feel much better afer the antibiot-
ics and steroids. You are still short of breath and occasionally see blood when you cough.
Some right-sided chest pain, sharp in nature. You have noticed a 2 stone weight loss over
the last few months but put this down to lack of appetite. No fevers or night sweats. No
foreign travel. Te cough has been keeping you awake at night and the breathlessness has
made your weekly shop more difcult. You are able to get yourself dressed without being
too breathless but have to walk slower than you used to due to shortness of breath.
Social 	You live with your husband. He is reasonably ft and well, although he has been unable to
attend with you today as he is at home with a bad cold. You have two children but they are
grown up and live ‘down South’. You are an ex-smoker – you gave up 6 years ago, previously
smoking 20 a day since you were 15. You don’t drink alcohol. You are a retired seamstress.
ICE 	You presume the CXR was looking for pneumonia so are worried why there is a fuss. You
were given antibiotics anyway. ‘Is it pneumonia? Should the antibiotics have cleared it?’
Your husband Peter had pneumonia a few years back and was quite poorly. You expect the
doctor to explain the CXR results. You would like the doctor to explain why you have been
referred to the hospital and what is likely to happen when you get there.
Examination 	Temperature 36.6 °C. HR 84 bpm. RR 16. Sats 94%. Normal chest examination. BMI 18.
Respiratory Health – 5

-- 492 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Lung Cancer
Causes of coin lesions1, 2:
• 	Malignancy: primary lung tumour or metastases.
• 	Infections: pneumonia, TB, abscess, hydatid cyst.
• 	Benign disease: granuloma (e.g. sarcoidosis), rheumatoid nodule, AV malformation.
Lung Cancer 2WW Criteria1
• 	Refer people using a suspected cancer pathway referral for lung cancer if they:
• 	Have CXR fndings that suggest lung cancer or
• 	Are aged 40 and over with unexplained haemoptysis.
• 	Ofer an urgent CXR (to be performed within 2 weeks)3 to assess for lung cancer in people aged 40
and over if they have two or more of the following unexplained symptoms, or if they have ever smoked
and have one or more of the following unexplained symptoms:
• 	Cough
• 	Fatigue
• 	Shortness of breath
• 	Chest pain
• 	Weight loss
• 	Appetite loss.
• 	Consider an urgent CXR (to be performed within 2 weeks)3 to assess for lung cancer in people aged
40 and over with any of the following:
• 	Persistent or recurrent chest infection.
• 	Finger clubbing.
• 	Supraclavicular lymphadenopathy or persistent cervical lymphadenopathy.
• 	Chest signs consistent with lung cancer.
• 	Trombocytosis.
‘Unexplained’ is defned as symptoms or signs that have not led to a diagnosis being made by the healthcare
professional in primary care afer initial assessment (including history, examination and any primary care
investigations).
➠ 478
Respiratory Health – 5

-- 493 of 575 --

Extra Notes1 Spirometry
➠ 479
Normal 	Obstruction 	Restrictive
FEV1/FVC (FEV1%) 	>0.7 	<0.7 	>0.7
FEV1 	>80% predicted 	<80% 	<80%
FVC 	>80% predicted 	Normal/low 	<80%
If overweight the spirometry may suggest they have a restrictive airway disease.
Must check relaxed VC as well as FVC. If VC > FVC then should calculate FEV1/VC.
Reliability: three consistent readings (within 5% or 150 mL).
Obstructive
Obstruction which is non-reversible confrms COPD. Severity of airway obstruction is classifed below:
• 	Mild 	FEV1 50–80%
• 	Mod 	FEV1 30–49%
• 	Severe 	<30%
Reversibility testing
Reversibility testing can be performed before and 20 minutes afer 2–4 pufs salbutamol.
Or before and afer a steroid trial (prednisolone 30 mg) for 14 days.
Always interpret the results of reversibility testing with the clinical history.
Restrictive
E.g. Fibrotic lung disease: extrinsic allergic alveolitis (farmer’s lung), sarcoidosis, silicosis, pneumoconiosis
and cryptogenic fbrosing alveolitis. Obesity, muscular weakness, curvature of spine.
COPD 	Asthma
Smoker or ex-smoker 	Nearly all 	Possibly
Symptoms under age 35 years 	Rare 	Ofen
Chronic productive cough 	Common 	Uncommon
Breathlessness 	Persistent and progressive 	Variable
Night time waking SOB/wheeze 	Uncommon 	Common
Variability 	Uncommon 	Common
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for useful links to
Flow volume and time volume curves
A guide to how to use and interpret spirometry in the GP practice
A fow chart – interpreting spirometry
Respiratory Health

-- 494 of 575 --



-- 495 of 575 --

CHAPTER 20 OVERVIEW
Sexual Health
➠ 481
Cases in this chapter 	Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Sexual Health
Learning points in this
chapter include:
1 	Erectile Dysfunction 	‘Male sexual dysfunction, including erectile
dysfunction due to organic causes (such as
diabetes, drug induced (including smoking),
neurological disease and vascular disease)
and psychological causes’
ED investigations and
management
The Well Man check
2 	Contraception –
Combined
‘Be aware of the key legal precedents,
guidelines, and ethical issues that infuence
sexual healthcare provision especially
regarding patients under 16 years of age in
relation to consent and confdentiality’
Fraser Guidelines
Missed pill rules
UKMEC guidelines
Evra patch
‘Female contraception including:
hormonal contraception: combined oral/patch/
ring contraception, progesterone-only methods
including oral, depot injection, subdermal
implant, intrauterine systems (IUS)’
‘Consent and confdentiality in respect of under
16s accessing sexual health services (Fraser
Guidelines)’
NuvaRing
3 	Pelvic Infammatory
Disease
‘Common and important conditions – pelvic
infammatory disease’
‘Be able to take a concise sexual history that
enables risk assessment for STI’
‘Vaginal swabs: use of ‘self-taken’ samples
(vulvo-vaginal and urine) for chlamydia and
gonorrhoea; indications for clinician-taken
swabs’
IMB
PID
4 	LARC and Sterilisation 	Other important content –
long-acting reversible contraception
sterilisation
Implant
Injection
IUS/IUD
5 	Gender Dysphoria 	‘Recognises that gender, gender identity,
gender dysphoria and sexual orientation are
all different facets of a person’s health and
that issues relating to these may present in
childhood, adolescence or adulthood and have
a wide infuence on wellbeing’
‘Feelings and behaviours related to gender
dysphoria’
Terminology
Helping patients with
gender identity issues
Extra
Notes
Emergency
Contraception
Stopping Contraception
‘Female contraception including … emergency
contraception’
Emergency
contraception
Stopping contraception

-- 496 of 575 --

CHAPTER 20 REFERENCES
Erectile Dysfunction
1. 	http://www.njurology.com/_forms/shim.pdf
2. 	http://patient.info/doctor/erectile-dysfunction. Apr 2016.
3. 	https://www.relate.org.uk/
4. 	NICE Guideline NG12. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Jan 2021.
Contraception – Combined
1. 	British Medical Association (BMA). Consent Toolkit. London, UK: BMA, 2019.
2. 	http://www.fsrh.org/pdfs/ceuGuidanceYoungPeople2010.pdf. May 2019.
3. 	https://www.fsrh.org/standards-and-guidance/documents/fsrh-ceu-guidance-recommended-actions-afer-incor-
rect-use-of/. Mar 2020.
5. 	https://www.fsrh.org/standards-and-guidance/documents/ukmec-2016-summary-sheets/. Sep 2019.
6. 	https://www.fsrh.org/documents/combined-hormonal-contraception/. Nov 2020.
7. 	Killick S.R., Eyong E., Elstein M. Ovarian follicular development in oral contraceptive cycles. Fertil Steril 1987; 48:
409–13.
8. 	Schwarz J.L., Creinin M.D., Pymar H.C., Reid L. Predicting risk of ovulation in new start oral contraceptive users.
Obstet Gynecol 2002; 99: 177–82.
9. 	Danforth D.R., Hodgen G.D. ‘Sunday start’ multiphasic oral contraception: ovulation prevention and delayed folli-
cular atresia in primates. Contraception 1989; 39: 321–30.
10. https://www.fsrh.org/standards-and-guidance/fsrh-guidelines-and-statements/quick-starting-contraception/. Apr
2017.
11. http://patient.info/health/contraceptive-patch. Oct 2017.
12. http://patient.info/health/contraceptive-vaginal-ring. Apr 2018.
Pelvic Infammatory Disease
1. 	http://patient.info/doctor/intermenstrual-and-postcoital-bleeding. Aug 2020.
LARC and Sterilisation
1. 	https://www.fsrh.org/standards-and-guidance/fsrh-guidelines-and-statements/method-specifc/progestogen-on-
ly-implants/. Feb 2021.
2. 	http://www.fsrh.org/pdfs/CEUGuidanceProgestogenOnlyInjectables.pdf. Oct 2020.
3. 	https://www.fsrh.org/standards-and-guidance/documents/ukmec-2016-summary-sheets/. Sep 2019.
Gender Dysphoria
1. 	https://www.stonewall.org.uk/help-advice/glossary-terms
2. 	https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/body-dysmorphia/
3. 	https://gids.nhs.uk/
4. 	https://gids.nhs.uk/parents-and-carers#how-can-i-help-my-teenager
Emergency Contraception
1. 	http://www.fsrh.org/pdfs/CEUguidanceEmergencyContraception11.pdf. Dec 2020.
2. 	Piaggio G., Kapp N., von Hertzen H. Efect on pregnancy rates of the delay in administration of levonorgestrel for
emergency contraception: a combined analysis of four WHO trials. Contraception 2011; 84: 35–9.
3. 	HRA Pharma UK Ltd. ellaOne: Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC). 2010.
4. 	http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc
5. 	Wilcox A.J., Dunson D., Baird D.D. Te timing of the ‘fertile window’ in the menstrual cycle: day specifc estimates
from a prospective study. Br Med J 2000; 321(7271): 1259–62.
Stopping Contraception
1. https://www.fsrh.org/documents/fsrh-guidance-contraception-for-women-aged-over-40-years-2017/. Sep 2019.
2. http://www.fsrh.org/pdfs/MaleFemaleSterilisation.pdf
Information taken from NICE guidelines with kind permission. Please note the guidelines change frequently
and you should ALWAYS check for the latest updated guidance. Remember that NICE guidance is only
applicable to patients in the UK.
➠ 482
Sexual Health

-- 497 of 575 --

➠ 483
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Kevin Barton 	57 years 	M
PMH 	Hypertension
Medications 	Indapamide 2.5 mg OD
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 498 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Erectile Dysfunction
Open ☐ 	Tank you for phoning. Tell me what made you ask for a Well Man check. What did you hope
we might include?
Sense ☐ 	Are there changes in your body you have noticed or are worried about?
History ☐ 	I see you have high BP but a recent reading was fne. Are you otherwise well? Do you live alone?
Work? Any stress in your life? How is your mood? Do you worry about your health?
Risk ☐ 	Do you smoke? How much alcohol do you drink? Any family history?
Flags ☐ 	Any pain in your chest, legs or breathing problems? Any problems going to the toilet? Do you
go at night or have problem with the fow? Dribbling at the end or needing to go again? Do you
check your testes for lumps? Any problems with erections? Do you have any erections? Is this
a problem maintaining erections or do you struggle to have an erection in the frst place? Are
you worried about anything else; for example, when you ejaculate? Do you have any erections
on your own or in the morning?
Impact ☐ 	How has the impotence afected you or your relationship?
Curious ☐ 	How is your relationship? What does your husband think? Have you had any other sexual part-
ners? When was this? Tell me more about this person? Male or female?
ICE ☐ 	Has this been worrying you? What has been going through your mind? What is your biggest
fear? Is there anything specifc you were hoping I would do today?
Impact ☐ 	Has anything else in your life changed since? Your mood? How are you and David?
Curious ☐ 	You mentioned David encouraged you to attend – is he worried about you?
Flags ☐ 	Do you have any symptoms that may suggest an infection?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you are troubled with impotence and you worry you may have an infection. You
are feeling low in mood and fear this may afect your marriage.
Empathy ☐ 	Impotence can ofen be frustrating and can increase the stress in your life.
O/E ☐ 	It would be helpful to examine you with a chaperone present to ensure the skin of the penis is
healthy, then check your BP and weight. Could you come to the surgery for this?
Experience ☐ 	Have you read or heard about anything that may cause impotence?
Explanation ☐ 	Stress or low mood or conditions that afect the vessels can cause impotence. For an erection,
blood needs to fow into the vessels in the penis.
Impression ☐ 	Either your BP or indapamide may contribute to impotence. It’s reassuring that you are some-
times able to have erections, so I think it is most likely due to your recent worries. What are your
thoughts? Infections don’t usually cause impotence but worry certainly can.
InCludE ☐ 	Given your worries, we could check for infections by getting you to come to the surgery for an
appointment, doing swabs and testing your urine?
Options ☐ 	Or – visit the GUM clinic which will provide a thorough assessment for infections quickly.
Tere is a walk-in clinic this afernoon. Shall I give you the details of where to go? We could try
stopping indapamide to see if this helps. You could also talk to a relationship counsellor or try
sildenafl (Viagra), which increases the blood fow to the penis. What would suit you best? I can
give you information on Relate, relationship counsellors.
Empower ☐ 	Have a think if there are lifestyle changes you could make that may help your vessels. You’ve
stopped playing squash but exercise is important. We can check your cholesterol and blood
sugar, both afect vessels. You have no prostate symptoms, but we ofer a blood test for prostate
cancer to anyone attending with impotence. I can email you a PIL to read about the test and its
limitations. I appreciate that discussing your prostate may be unexpected, but can be part of a
Well Man check. We examine the prostate through the back passage, as well as arranging a blood
test. Shall I go into detail about this now? Okay, let’s discuss when you come to surgery.
Recommend ☐ I recommend waiting to have sex until your sexual health screen is clear and, if you do need treat-
ment, both you and David should complete this before you have sex. Here is a prescription for
50mg sildenafl. Take one an hour before you plan to have sex. It works for hours, so no rush. It will
only cause an erection when you become aroused. Unfortunately, some men may get a headache.
Specifcs ☐ 	Please book in to speak to me in a month to discuss your results and catch up?
Safety net ☐ 	If your mood deteriorates or anything else worries you, please phone me sooner.
➠ 484
Sexual Health – 1

-- 499 of 575 --

➠ 485	
Patient’s Story 	Erectile Dysfunction
Doctor’s notes Kevin Barton, 57 years. PMH: HTN. Medications: indapamide 2.5 mg OD. BP 2 weeks ago
134/78.
How to act 	Embarrassed. You do not give much away unless pushed.
You do not mention you have a problem with ED until the doctor asks directly.
Ten call it impotence.
PC 	‘I would like to know if I can have a Well Man check please.’
History 	Your friends have had a Well Man check.
You are unsure what this is exactly.
You have no symptoms of bladder outfow obstruction.
You have had problems with impotence.
You have morning erections and fnd masturbation easier.
You are well and healthy. You exercise. You do not smoke.
You drink 1 pint of lager a night.
You have no other medical history and no family history.
Social 	You married your male partner, David, 3 years ago.
David has encouraged you to go to the GP.
You had an afair a year ago with a male friend from the squash club and for which you feel
guilty. You do not disclose this until the doctor explores your sexual history.
Tis has put stress on your marriage.
You no longer see this friend or play squash.
ICE 	You fear you have an STI and that one day your husband will discover this.
You fear your relationship with your husband ending if he ever found out.
You fear you have let him down and are struggling to forget what you did.
You would like blood tests for a general check-up but don’t insist on a prostate test and you
would prefer time to think about prostate tests if this is mentioned.
You would like to try Viagra.
Examination 	Genitalia NAD. BP 134/78. BMI 24.
Sexual Health – 1

-- 500 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Erectile Dysfunction
Causes of ED
Vascular
disease 	Risk factors include: HTN, smoking, hypercholesterolaemia and DM.
Structural 	Surgery within the pelvis. Peyronie’s disease.
Skin
disorders 	Foreskin problems such as lichen sclerosus (balanitis xerotica obliterans).
Neurological 	Tumour, spinal cord disease, MS, Parkinson’s, stroke, peripheral neuropathy (DM).
Hormonal 	Hypogonadism, Cushing’s, thyroid, hyperprolactinaemia.
Drug induced 	Diuretics, SSRIs, GnRH analogues and antagonists, antipsychotics.
Alcohol and recreational drugs
Psychological
causes 	Stress, depression, anxiety, relationship difculties, performance anxiety.
SHIM 	Sexual health inventory for men1 score may be useful.
Tailor investigations to the likely cause depending on symptoms, age and risk factors.
Te patient may have their own terminology in a sexual health history. Use words they have
chosen.
Make no assumptions. Ask about other sexual partners and confrm their partner’s gender.
Management options
Sildenafl 	Generic available on NHS prescription now. CI include: already on a nitrate, unstable
angina, recent MI or stroke, optic neuropathy.
Side efects: headaches, fushing, N&V, dizziness and visual disturbances.
Interactions: no alpha-blocker within 4 hours.
Other options 	2nd line tadalafl (Cialis) with a longer duration of efect.
Vacuum pumps. MUSE (alfraprostadil per urethra) and Caverject.2
Relationship counselling3 or a referral to psychosexual medicine may be helpful.
Show you have recognised the opportunity for health screening and promotion.
The Well Man
check 	CVD RFs, prostate and testicular screening, weight and bowel changes, stress/mood.
PSA screening Ofer all men with ED PSA screening.4
➠ 486
Sexual Health – 1

-- 501 of 575 --

➠ 487
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Gemma Briggs 	15 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Davina Briggs 	48 years 	F
Simon Briggs 	47 years 	M

-- 502 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Contraception – Combined
Open ☐ 	What’s led to this decision? How did you meet your partner?
Flags ☐ 	I can help today but I need to ask a few personal questions to make sure we make the right choice
for you and, as you are under 16, I have to make sure you are not at risk. Is anyone forcing you
to have sex? How old is your boyfriend? As you tell me you are in no danger then what you say
to me is confdential. Have you had sex already? Is there any possibility you might be pregnant
now? Would you have sex if you were not on the contraceptive pill? What is your relationship
like with your parents? Could you tell them? What might they say? Is there anyone else you could
talk to, an older sister or auntie perhaps?
ICE ☐ 	Do you have any worries about starting the pill? Was there anything else you were hoping for?
History ☐ 	When was your last period? Do you have a regular cycle? Before we proceed, I would just like
to check you have no other medical problems that would prevent you from taking the pill. Do
you have any health problems? Take any medicines? Do you smoke? Can you tell me how tall
you are and how much you weigh? Tank you.
Risk ☐ 	Have you or anyone in your family ever had a blood clot? Do you sufer with migraines?
Have you ever had a headache which caused a problem with your vision or arms or legs?
Has anyone in the family had breast cancer?
SummarICE ☐ 	So to summarise, you are in a new relationship and you’d like to start the pill. You don’t have any
worries about this but would like some more information.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about the pill?
Explanation ☐ 	Te OCP is taken for 21 days then you have a 7-day break when you will have your period. Side
efects can include breast tenderness or mood changes. Tere are risks to consider when taking
the pill. Rarely, women can have a stroke or a blood clot due to the pill. Te COCP also slightly
increases your risk of breast and cervical cancer; however, it is protective against ovarian and
womb cancer. No contraception is 100% protective against pregnancy and the pill does not pro-
tect you against STIs. Can I please check I have been clear; what are the risks of the pill? Tat’s
correct.
InCludE ☐ 	You’ve indicated you would like to start the pill and that is certainly an option.
Options ☐ 	Tere are more reliable options such as a hormone implant which is like a matchstick under the
skin, an injection or a coil in the womb. Are you interested in any of these? Okay.
Recommend ☐ I suggest starting the pill on the frst day of your next period. Do you feel you can wait until
then? If you miss one pill then that is okay, just take it when you remember, even if that means
taking two in a day. However, if you miss two or more pills within the month then you will need
to use condoms for 7 days. If this happens in the frst week of the pill packet and you’ve had sex
during your pill-free week, you may need EC. If this occurs in the third week of the packet, miss
the break and start the next packet straightaway. Remember to use condoms for 7 days.
Empathy ☐ 	I know this is a lot to take in. If you’re ever unsure what to do, please phone us for advice. Tere
is a leafet in the pill packet which can also help and you should read it now and keep it safe.
Can I check I have been clear? Can you explain to me how to take the pill?
Empower ☐ 	I will email you a PIL so you have further information regarding what to do if you are unwell.
For example, if you have vomiting or diarrhoea. Remember, only condoms protect you from
STIs. You should always encourage your partner to have an STI check. Do protect yourself as
STIs can cause long-term pain or infertility.
Future ☐ 	I will send a prescription to the chemist for you to collect; the pill is called Microgynon. Tere
is nothing to pay: even when you become 16, the pill is free if you tick the ‘free of charge con-
traceptive’ box on the back of the prescription. You will need a pill check just before your frst
box runs out in 3 months. Please book in with our practice nurse or a GP. Please call if you have
any questions in the meantime.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever have a painful swollen leg or a severe headache, see a doctor immediately as these
may be signs of the rare risks of the pill.
➠ 488
Sexual Health – 2

-- 503 of 575 --

➠ 489	
Patient’s Story 	Contraception – Combined
Doctor’s notes Gemma Briggs, 15 years. PMH: none. Medications: none. BP 1 week ago (self-check at the
surgery) 90/50.
How to act 	Mature and intelligent.
PC 	‘I would like to go on the pill.’
History 	You have a new boyfriend. You met at school in your class.
No one is forcing you. You have not had sex yet.
You would also use condoms.
You would still have sex even if you were not prescribed contraception.
You get on well with your parents but will not tell them. It would just be too awkward.
However, you will tell your older sister, who is 22 years. You know that your sister had to
have her BP checked before she started the pill, so you have gone into the self-check area
at the surgery to do this already.
No PMH or other medication.
Height 170 cm. Weight 55 kg. BMI 19.
You have read a little about the pill on the internet but would like the doctor to explain again.
A friend of yours has a contraceptive implant but you don’t like how it feels under the skin.
You aren’t keen on regular injections and wouldn’t like anything inserted into your womb.
You started your periods when you were 12 – they are usually regular 7/30.
Your LMP was 3 weeks ago, you expect to start again in about 5 days’ time.
You do not plan to have sex prior to your period and are happy to wait.
Social 	In year 10 at school. Living with parents. Your older sister lives with her partner. Never
smoked.
ICE 	You have no concerns.
Sexual Health – 2

-- 504 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Contraception – Combined
To meet Fraser guidelines the patient:
• 	Will not tell her parent/carer despite encouragement from the doctor.
• 	Understands the advice.
• 	Is likely to have sex if the contraception is not prescribed.
• 	Her mental or physical health may be at risk if not prescribed.
• 	It is in her best interests.1,2
• 	In practice you should document all this clearly in the notes.
‘Is this confdential?’ A suggested answer begins with ‘yes’ – ‘Yes … so long as you are not in danger.’
Understanding the OCP missed pill (>24 hours) rules
‘No indication for EC if the pills in the preceding 7 days have been taken consistently and correctly (assuming
the pills thereafer are taken correctly and additional contraceptive precautions are used).’3 Terefore the
week prior to and following the pill-free week is the most risky time as 7 days could be extended. Although
the standard advice suggests one pill can be missed anywhere in the pack, if the woman were to take her
next pill late (but not missed), the risk of ovulation and therefore pregnancy is increased. Te woman may
choose to have a 4-day pill-break to minimise this risk.
Te advice for backup contraception for 7 days following two missed pills ‘may be overcautious in the second
and third weeks, but the advice is a backup in the event that further pills are missed.’3
UKMEC guidelines4 	Contraception cautions and contraindications.
‘Each UK category should be considered separately (it is NOT appropriate to
consider categories 1 and 2 safe and 3 and 4 unsafe).’5
Tailored regimes 	Te woman does not have to have a period every month! She may prefer to tricy-
cle 3 packets (without pill-free days) or back-to-back packets until breakthrough
bleeding occurs then have 4–7 pill-free days. Some can take continuously whether
they bleed or not. Tese regimes reduce risk of pregnancy so are supported by
FSRH but may be of licence.6
Commencing the OCP 	‘COCs containing ethinylestradiol can be started up to and including Day 5 of
the cycle without the need for additional contraceptive protection.’6–9
Risk of OCP to a fetus 	Studies are limited but with no consistent data to support serious abnormalities.
Read more at ‘Efects of fetal exposure to steroid hormones’10 within the reference.
Benefts 	Decreased risk ovarian/endometrial/colorectal cancer.9
May reduce menopausal symptoms.9
Thrombosis risks 	>3 hour fight – ‘should be advised about reducing periods of immobility’.9
>7 days at >4500 m altitude – ‘consider switching to an alternative method’.9
Increased risks 	Breast and cervical cancer, thrombosis and stroke9 – read more within the
reference.
Evra patch 	Weekly for 3 weeks then a patch-free week. If falls of >48 hours – apply a new
patch, condoms for 7 days and ECP if sex within the previous 5 days.11
NuvaRing 	Insert for 3 weeks then remove for 1 week.
If it falls out, no need for condoms or ECP if replaced within 3 hours.12
➠ 490
Sexual Health – 2

-- 505 of 575 --

➠ 491
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Stephanie Smith 	24 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	Cilest
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 506 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Pelvic Infammatory Disease
Open ☐ 	Tell me more about this spotting? Anything else that is new? How are your periods?
ICE ☐ 	What has gone through your mind as to what may be causing this bleeding? Is there any-
thing specifc that you worry is causing it? Any other thoughts? What did you think I may
suggest today?
History ☐ 	Do you have any medical problems? Allergies? Do you remember to take your pill? Tell me
more about you. Are you in a relationship? Is that long-term?
Impact ☐ 	How has the bleeding impacted on day-to-day life or the relationship?
Sense ☐ 	I can see that you are keen to get to the bottom of this and I hear how bothersome this is
for you.
Risk ☐ 	I’m wondering about clues in your sexual history – have you ever had an STI? Could you
be at risk? When did you frst have sex? Have you had a check-up since restarting your
relationship? Has any family member had any women’s health problems? When was your
LMP? Was the period due? Was it a normal period?
Flags ☐ 	Have you had any: fevers? Bleeding afer sex? Pain during sex? Discharge? Smell? Burning
passing urine? Or going more frequently? How are your bowels? How do you feel in your-
self? Any stomach pain?
Curious ☐ 	Have you spoken to your partner about relationships you have had during your time apart?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, spotting for 2 months is starting to impact on everyday life. You have had
lower stomach pain including during intercourse. You are not sure what has caused this or
what to expect today.
O/E ☐ 	May I examine you? I’d like to take your temperature and pulse, feel your tummy and feel the
womb through the vagina, as pain may suggest an infection. May I look at the neck of the
womb with a speculum, a plastic tube, which fts into the vagina? It can be uncomfortable
but will allow me to check the cervix and take swabs for infection including general bacteria,
thrush, chlamydia and gonorrhoea. Does this sound okay? Would you like a chaperone? May
I have a urine sample for a pregnancy and infection test?
Impression ☐ 	I believe you may have an infection, possibly chlamydia, causing pelvic infammatory
disease.
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across either of these?
Recommend ☐ Before the chlamydia result returns, I would prefer to treat for what I suspect is infamma-
tion from an infection.
Explanation ☐ If not treated, you could become unwell or have problems with fertility in the future. Two
antibiotics, metronidazole and ofoxacin, are taken twice a day for 14 days. You can use
paracetamol/ibuprofen for pain relief. You cannot drink alcohol during this treatment as
you will be unwell due to the metronidazole antibiotic.
Empathy ☐ 	Do you think you will be able to tell your boyfriend? What might he say?
Empower ☐ 	Does this plan sound okay so far? You should both complete the sexual health screen at the
GUM clinic. Please do not have sex again until you have both been assessed and completed
any necessary treatment. Your smear test, which screens for cancer of the cervix, is due
next year. Any questions? Te risk of chlamydia is infertility so it is important to protect
yourself.
Specifcs ☐ 	Please arrange to speak to the doctor again next week about your test results.
Future ☐ 	If the bleeding persists then we will review your pill.
Safety net ☐ 	If your period is late, please repeat the pregnancy test. If you start to feel unwell, the stom-
ach pain feels worse, you have a fever or if the symptoms and bleeding have not started to
improve within 48 hours, please see the doctor straight away as infections can be serious
if you don’t respond to the antibiotics. I can explain any of that again if you like? So, when
would you seek help from a doctor? Yes, you’ve got it.
➠ 492
Sexual Health – 3

-- 507 of 575 --

➠ 493	
Patient’s Story 	Pelvic Infammatory Disease
Doctor’s notes Stephanie Smith, 24 years. PMH: none. Medication: Cilest.
How to act 	Very pleasant.
PC 	‘It’s my periods. I don’t bleed just during my period but other times too.’
History 	2 months of bleeding – spotting randomly throughout the month.
Occasional PCB.
You are very well in yourself and have no prescribed medications.
LMP almost 4 weeks ago.
Your LMP was a 5-day period surrounded by the spotting.
Periods have always been regular. You are a good pill taker. No FH.
No medicines apart from the OCP which you commenced 18/12 ago.
You have had deep pain on intercourse but you didn’t make the connection.
You have had some lower abdominal pain and thought this may be your bowels.
You occasionally need a Fybogel for mild constipation.
You have no urinary symptoms.
No PV discharge. You have never had an STI check.
You have never had an STI or a smear test. You have never been pregnant.
You split up from your boyfriend 8 months ago.
Te relationship restarted 3 months ago.
During the break you both had one other sexual contact using condoms.
Since the age of 18 years, you have had two other sexual relationships in total.
Te bleeding has been too light to comfortably use tampons and you don’t like the smell of
wearing liners. You have also had to avoid intercourse.
You will tell your partner what the GP says today.
You realise you should have both been to GUM.
Social 	You did a Master of Business Administration and now you are an investment banker.
You are enjoying your job and thrive on the pressure of the work. You are happy in your
relationship. All is going well.
ICE 	You have no idea why you are bleeding. It is just very irritating. You are not concerned about
anything particular, only that it may continue. You have no idea what the GP will suggest.
O/E 	Abdomen. LIF pain. No palpable mass. No guarding or rebound tenderness.
PV – lef adnexal tenderness and cervical excitation. No masses.
Speculum – normal-looking cervix.
HR 70 bpm. Apyrexial. BP 120/60. Urine dipstick negative.
Pregnancy test negative.
Sexual Health – 3

-- 508 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Intermenstrual Bleeding
Causes 	Physiological 	2% spot around ovulation.1
Pregnancy 	Miscarriage or ectopic.
Smear/trauma
Infection or vaginitis
Structural/histological 	Cancer, polyps or ectropion.
Any contraception 	Especially low oestrogen hormones.
↓Contraception efcacy 	Secondary to interactions, e.g. tamoxifen, steroids, SSRIs,
warfarin, St John’s wort.1
History 	Menstrual history 	Onset, LMP, IMB, PCB and cycle pattern.
Gynaecological history 	Smears, contraception, operations and FH.
Obstetric history 	Gravida and parity.
Sexual history 	Age became sexually active, partners and infections.
General health 	Feeling unwell or fevers, urinary/bowel symptoms.
Risk factors 	Endometrial cancer 	Obesity, PCOS, nulliparity and late frst child.
Cervical cancer/STI 	Early sexual activity and multiple partners.
Examination 	Abdomen 	Tenderness and masses.
Pelvic examination 	Masses, adnexal tenderness and cervical excitation.
Inspection and speculum 	Vulva, vagina and cervix (ectropion/polyps/ulceration).
Swab for infection 	i.e. chlamydia, gonorrhoea, TV, BV, candida.
Observations 	If possibility of infection/sepsis.
Investigations 	Pregnancy test (ask the patient to do this at home).
If negative it needs to be repeated 3 weeks afer last UPSI.
Urine dipstick. Swabs. FBC/TFT.
Consider TVUSS to assess the endometrium and, if abnormal/ongoing concern (especially
if >40 years), a hysteroscopy for biopsies.1
Be sure the woman does not meet the criteria for a 2WW gynaecology cancer referral.
Gynaecology rule
Te same rule applies to both abnormal PV bleeding or pelvic pain.
Consider/rule out pregnancy, infection and structural/histological causes.
Structural/histological causes include polyps, fbroids, cancer or ovarian cysts.
Remember no contraception is 100% so do not be reassured if they are taking a contraception.
If the cause of abnormal bleeding (especially in a young woman) is most likely secondary to her hormone Rx,
you may decide to change Rx as a trial frst before investigating (but do exclude pregnancy and chlamydia).
Te IMB may be due to the strength of the OCP, especially if menses occurs early but remains regular.
Consider changing the progesterone or increasing the dose of the ethinylestradiol to 30–35 μg and the next
step may be a triphasic OCP. Remember the ↑risk of the OCP with increasing strengths of ethinylestradiol.
PID 	Symptoms may include: dyspareunia, discharge, abnormal bleeding, pain and fevers.
Signs: adnexal tenderness ± cervical excitation ± fever or tachycardia or low BP.
Treat immediately as per local guidance before waiting for swab results.
Refer if systemically unwell or no improvement in 48 hours or pregnant.
➠ 494
Sexual Health – 3

-- 509 of 575 --

➠ 495
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Fedora Baros 	38 years 	F
PMH 	No information
Medications 	Ovranette
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Domenic Baros 	42 years 	M
Fedora telephones with her husband Domenic present. He is also registered at the
practice and has no known medical history.

-- 510 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	LARC and Sterilisation
Open ☐ 	Please tell me about what has led to this decision.
ICE ☐ 	What are your thoughts so far?
History ☐ 	I’m interested to know more about you both. Fedora, do you have any medical history? Have
you ever been pregnant? Do you have regular periods? Do you take any tablets?
Flags ☐ 	Would you mind, Domenic, if I spoke to Fedora alone for a couple of minutes? Would you
be able to leave the room and close the door? Fedora, because you are my patient today, I just
wanted to make sure that you have not been encouraged by anyone to make a decision you are
not comfortable with.
Risk ☐ 	Before thinking about the coil, have you had any abnormal bleeding in between periods or afer
sex, or heavier bleeding or discharge? Any pain on intercourse or infections in the past 3 months?
Are your periods manageable or painful?
ICE ☐ 	What is the right thing for you? Did you have any concerns at all? Or worries about either pro-
cedure? How would you feel if you did fall pregnant? It sounds as if this would be stressful for
you. What did you expect us to decide today? Is there anything else you were wondering? Or
would like to discuss today?
Impact ☐ 	How is your relationship? We should consider your risk of regret if your husband had a perma-
nent procedure. You should be at peace with a vasectomy being irreversible.
Sense ☐ 	You were not expecting me to say that? Does this change things? Is your mood okay?
Curious ☐ 	How would Domenic feel if you fell pregnant? Is there anything you want to ask whilst we are
alone? Would you like to fnish this consultation with the two of us or invite your husband back
in? Are you happy for me to share your concerns with Domenic?
SummarICE ☐ 	Hello Domenic. To summarise, you have both made the decision to not have children together.
Fedora, you feel that this would put you under fnancial pressure. You are currently looking
for work. You are fed up with taking the pill. Terefore, you are both happy with the plan for
a vasectomy. However, Fedora you were not aware that this should be seen as irreversible. We
started to discuss the risk of regret; for example, if you did fnd work life became less stressful
and you decided you wanted children. Te other option you have considered is the coil, but you
do not want erratic bleeding and you feel comforted by regular periods.
Impression ☐ 	You would like a reliable form of contraception which you can forget about and is free from
hormones, but is reversible should things change. You wondered about the coil.
Options ☐ 	Other options include using condoms or a diaphragm if you wish to avoid all hormones, con-
tinuing with the pill or hormones in the form of an injection or skin implant.
Experience ☐ 	What do you understand about how the coil works? And the risks?
Explanation ☐ 	Tere are two types of coil – the copper coil which has no hormones and usually gives regular
periods but you may have heavier and longer periods. Or the hormone coil which is the one
which can give erratic bleeding or no bleeding at all. As you have manageable periods you may
fnd you tolerate heavier periods with a copper coil. No contraception is 100% but the coil is a
very good form of contraception. If you did fall pregnant, however, there is an increased risk of
ectopic pregnancy, a pregnancy not in the womb, which is dangerous. Tere is the risk of pushing
an infection through to the womb and if this occurred you may become very unwell, but we
minimise this risk by recommending swabs to check for infection a week before we ft the coil,
and it is a sterile procedure, which means we use equipment which is very clean. Tere is a 1 in
20 chance the coil may fall out, especially in the frst few months. When we put it in, your blood
pressure may drop or you may be in pain. Usually, the pain is like a period cramp which settles.
Tere is a 1–2/1000 chance of the coil going through the womb.
Empower ☐ 	Have you made a decision or may I provide you with information to explain further? I can email
this to you.
Empathy ☐ 	It is a lot of information and a big decision. Domenic, what are your thoughts?
Specifcs ☐ 	Would you like to call me when you have made a decision or if you have further questions?
I will also email you some information on vasectomies.
➠ 496
Sexual Health – 4

-- 511 of 575 --

➠ 497	
Patient’s Story 	LARC and Sterilisation
Doctor’s notes Fedora Baros, 38 years. PMH: none. Medications: Ovranette.
Husband Domenic Baros, 42 years, is also present in the call.
How to act 	Very pleasant.
PC 	‘We would like to discuss whether the coil or vasectomy is the best option.’
History 	You have decided not to have children.
Tis is a decision you have made together.
You have been married for 2 years.
Domenic has three children from a previous marriage.
Fedora has not been married before and has no children.
You are both very well and have no medical history. You take no medicines.
Social 	Fedora 	You are currently unemployed. Money is tight and you are looking for work.
You used to work as a cleaner. You have decided you are not able to aford
having a child. You believe you are happy with this decision.
Domenic 	You are a security guard. You see your three children twice a month. You would
be very happy to have children if this is what Fedora wanted. However, she has
decided that with life’s stressors you should not have more children.
Neither of you smokes or drinks.
ICE 	Fedora 	You would prefer Domenic to have a vasectomy.
You are fed up with taking the OCP. You don’t want any hormones in your
body. You have concerns about the coil as you have heard that it is painful.
You expect the doctor will arrange a vasectomy for Domenic today.
You believe that if you did change your mind the vasectomy can be reversed by
putting the tubes back together. If asked about your risk of regret, you become
unsure.
Your main concern about the coil is erratic bleeding. You like monthly and
regular periods.
If the doctor explains how the coil is inserted and discusses the risks, you decide
you feel comfortable to have this procedure.
Domenic 	You are happy to have a vasectomy if this is what Fedora wants.
You decided to call the doctor together, however, to discuss all options.
You expect the doctor will arrange a vasectomy for you today.
Sexual Health – 4

-- 512 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Long-Acting Reversible Contraception
Contraceptive implant1
Implant indication 	LARC or dysmenorrhoea.
How to take 	Insert days 1–5 of cycle. Repeat within 3 years.
Side effects 	Acne, bleeding changes, mood or libido changes and headaches reported although
‘no evidence of a causal association’.1 No osteoporosis risk.
Bleeding risk 	<1/4 regular periods, 1/3 infrequent bleeding, 1/5 no bleeding, and 1/4 frequent/
prolonged bleeding.1
Lost implant 	If impalpable implant, use additional contraception and arrange an USS.
Problematic bleeding 	Exclude pregnancy, chlamydia and malignancy (view cervix).
Consider an additional hormone of licence (COCP or POP) for 3 months.1
Use judgement: risk unknown with longer use and see guidance.
Injection2
Side effects 	Te same as other progesterone contraceptives and ‘associated with weight gain’.2
Fertility 	Can be delayed for up to 1 year afer discontinuation.2
BMD 	Small loss of BMD usually recovers afer discontinuation. Review 2-yearly.2
Caution/CI 	Maximum recommended age of 50 years. Caution in CVD.2
IUS (Mirena)/IUD (Copper)2
Indication 	IUS = LARC, progesterone cover for HRT and menorrhagia.
IUD = LARC and EC.
Mode of action 	IUS prevents implantation. IUD prevents fertilisation and implantation.
Risks 	Infection, perforation, failure rate, ectopic, expulsion and cervical shock.
Contraindications 	Must be ‘reasonably certain’2 she is not pregnant.
See also UKMEC guidance.3
Side effects 	IUS: erratic bleeding. Small risk of systemic progesterone side efects.
IUD may give longer/heavier periods.
Tampons can be used.
Licensing of duration 	Mirena 	= 5 years.
= 4 years if the indication is endometrial protection for HRT.
Jaydess 	= 3 years.
Copper 	= depends on the device – 5 or 10 years so check the device.
See the Link Hub at completeMRCGP.co.uk for a link to UKMEC guidance which should
be followed when commencing contraception.
➠ 498
Sexual Health – 4

-- 513 of 575 --

➠ 499
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Florence Wriggley 	13 years 	F
PMH 	Nil
Medications 	Nil
Allergies 	NKDA
Consultations 	Nil
Investigations 	Nil
Household 	Michael Wriggley 	40 years 	M
Veronica Wriggley 	39 years 	F
Veronica is phoning about Florence.

-- 514 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Gender Dysphoria
Open ☐ 	I’m sorry you have been worried, what changes have you noticed?
ICE ☐ 	What thoughts have you had about what may be going on? What worries you most? Had
you had any thoughts about how I could help?
Impact ☐ 	Tis sounds like a challenging time. Has this been afecting the family?
History ☐ 	Did there seem to be any trigger to her change in behaviour? How are things at home
generally? How has she been at school? Have you spoken to Flo about your worries? Have
you noticed changes in her mood?
Risk ☐ 	Are you aware of any bullying at school or over the internet? Has she struggled with her
mood in the past? Has she mentioned feeling very low?
Flags ☐ 	Any concerns about self-harm? Has she expressed any suicidal thoughts?
Empathy ☐ 	Tis must be a confusing and worrying time for you and Flo. Nobody wants to see their
child unhappy.
Sense ☐ 	Emotionally how do you feel?
Experience ☐ 	Have you come across gender identity issues before?
SummarICE ☐ 	So since beginning her periods about a year ago, Flo’s behaviour has changed, for example
wearing baggy clothes and getting rid of anything girly. She seems to be self-conscious about
her body and she told you that she feels that she should have been born a boy. You wonder
if she is gay or possibly transgender. You were hoping I could provide some information
about this and how to support her.
Impression ☐ 	It sounds as if Flo may be struggling with her gender identity, or this could be a sign of a
mental health problem, or possibly a mixture of both.
InCludE ☐ 	Being ‘gay’ is a term which means you are romantically or sexually interested in people
of the same sex. Transgender is diferent, this means that the person feels like they are a
diferent gender to the one they were given at birth. As if the body is one gender but the
mind is another. Gender is now thought of as a spectrum, with male and female at opposite
ends but everything in between does exist.
Explanation ☐ It is completely normal for children and adolescents to explore gender and thoughts can
change with time. However, if thoughts are persistent into adolescence, then help may be
needed to explore the person’s gender identity more formally.
Options ☐ 	Initially it would be really helpful if I could meet Flo so we can chat about her feelings and
I can see if there are any signs of signifcant anxiety or depression. It may be that she needs
help from our counselling team or even our children’s mental health team. If needed, we
could refer her to the gender identity team.
Empower ☐ 	In the meantime you can support her by reminding her she is normal, that you love her and
that it is fne for her to take her time in discovering who she is. It may be helpful to speak
to school so they can be sure to support her too.
Future ☐ 	Would it be possible for us to meet up in person with Flo in the next couple of weeks?
Specifcs ☐ 	Please arrange an appointment with me at reception.
Safety net ☐ 	Great, we will meet soon but if you notice any evidence of self-harm, have concerns about
suicidal thoughts or any other worries, please get in touch with us straight away. Te
Gender Identity Development Service website has lots of information you and Flo may
fnd helpful.
➠ 500
Sexual Health – 5

-- 515 of 575 --

➠ 501	
Patient’s Story 	Gender Dysphoria
Doctor’s notes Florence Wriggley, 13 years.
You are her mother – Veronica Wriggley.
How to act 	Concerned
PC 	‘I’m worried about Flo; she’s been acting oddly recently and seems unhappy.’
History 	Florence was always a happy child but over the last year or so she seems unhappy. Initially
you thought that it was just the challenges of growing up but now you’re not so sure. She
has always been a ‘tomboy’ but last week you caught her wrapping a bandage around her
chest. When you asked her what she was doing she looked embarrassed but then told you
she ‘should have been a boy’. Looking back, you feel that her mood changed around the
time her periods started last year. Flo seems anxious a lot of the time and worries over small
things. She has started refusing to do PE at school and says it’s because she doesn’t want to
get changed in front of the other girls. She’s cleared out her wardrobe and replaced anything
even slightly girly with baggy T-shirts and jeans. She’s started wearing trousers to school.
Flo has been spending more and more time in her room. She has become distant from her
friends and keeps saying that she no longer fts in. You are worried and don’t know what
to do.
Social 	Florence is attending school and still plays football but seems less enthusiastic about going
now. You are not aware of any bullying at school. Her teachers have noticed a drop in the
quality of her schoolwork. She is bright – but not attaining at present. You work as a nail
technician and Florence’s dad is a builder. You are open minded about gender/sexual
identity issues but come from a traditional family and you worry what Flo’s grandparents
will say.
ICE 	You think Florence may be gay or possibly transgender but you aren’t really sure what
the diference is and if such issues can afect a child so young. You are worried that she is
having a difcult time and will become depressed. You want information from the GP and
advice about support and how to talk to Flo. You would like the GP to explain the diference
between being gay and transgender.
Sexual Health – 5

-- 516 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Gender Dysphoria
Terminology1
Trans – An umbrella term to describe people whose gender is not the same as, or does not sit comfortably
with, the sex they were assigned at birth.
Trans people may describe themselves using one or more of a wide variety of terms, including (but not lim-
ited to) transgender, transsexual, gender-queer (GQ), gender-fuid, non-binary, gender-variant, crossdresser,
genderless, agender, non-gender, third gender, bi-gender, trans man, trans woman, trans masculine, trans
feminine and neutrois.
Transgender man – a person who was assigned female at birth but now lives and identifes as a man.
Transgender woman – a person who was assigned male at birth but now lives and identifes as a woman.
Non-binary – an umbrella term for people whose gender identity does not sit comfortably with ‘man’ or
‘woman’.
Gender dysphoria – when a person experiences discomfort or distress because there is a mismatch between
their gender assigned at birth and their gender identity.
Pansexual – a person whose romantic and/or sexual attraction towards others is not limited by sex or gender.
Body dysmorphia – body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), or body dysmorphia, is a mental health condition
where a person spends a lot of time worrying about faws in their appearance. Tese faws are ofen unno-
ticeable to others.2
Helping patients with gender identity issues
Gender is now believed to be a spectrum with male on one end and female on the other. It is normal for
children to explore gender and may demonstrate preferences across the spectrum. Not all these preferences
will remain with the child through adolescence. However, some will continue to identify with a diferent
gender to which they were assigned at birth. In children and adults experiencing this, it is common for
mental health problems to coexist, e.g. anxiety or depression. Helping patients will need to incorporate both
gender identity needs and mental health needs. Specialist gender clinics exist (Gender Identity Development
Service)3 where patients can be assessed by a specialist, and where appropriate, can be guided through gen-
der reassignment treatments. Hormone blockers (GnRH analogues) can be used in adolescents followed by
hormone treatments (testosterone or oestrogen). Ultimately, surgery can be performed to change a person’s
sexual characteristics. Tis usually takes place afer ‘social gender role transition’ where a person is living as
their chosen gender (e.g. changed name, etc.) and they have taken hormone treatments.
Ways parents can help4
• 	Remind young people that they are normal. It is normal to explore gender.
• 	Consider how gender identity is expressed in their family – does the child ft in? If not, they may need
extra support to feel accepted. Try to avoid overtly masculine or feminine roles.
• 	Encourage the young person to talk about their feelings.
• 	Accept uncertainty about what the future holds. Encourage exploration and keep options open.
• 	Consider where sources of anxiety are coming from.
➠ 502
Sexual Health – 5

-- 517 of 575 --

➠ 503	
Extra Notes 	Emergency Contraception
Levonorgestrel (LNG) 1.5 mg, e.g. Levonelle
Prevents/delays ovulation. Licence = up to 72 hours.
Efcacy demonstrated up to 96 hours1,2 and if other EC is not an option consider prescribing up to 120
hours (of-licence use).3
If vomiting occurs within 2 hours of ingestion then repeat the LNG dose.4
Double the dose or ofer a Cu-IUD if liver enzyme inducing drugs have been taken with 28/7.1
Ulipristal acetate (UPA) = EllaOne 30 mg
CI: pregnancy, hypersensitivity to UPA and severe asthma.1
Caution in hepatic dysfunction or if liver enzyme inducing drugs have been taken with 28/7.1
Prevents/delays ovulation. Licence = 120 hours.
If vomits <3 hours repeat UPA.4
Cu-IUD
CI if there is a risk that implantation has already taken place.
Licence: can be inserted up to 5 days afer SI or up to 5 days afer ovulation (only if regular cycles) – which-
ever event is the latest. If referring for Cu-IUD also provide oral EC when possible in case insertion is delayed
or the patient changes her mind.
Prevents fertilisation and implantation.1
‘All women requiring EC should be ofered a Cu-IUD if appropriate as it is the most efective method
of EC.’1
Quick-starting contraception is off licence after an emergency contraceptive
pill
Advise to check a pregnancy test 3 weeks later or if there is a delayed period.
Afer LNG can start straight away but use condoms for 7 days with COCP, or 2 days with POP, or 9 days
for Qlaira.1
Afer UPA, contraception should be delayed for 5 days as may block efectiveness of UPA. Afer starting use,
extra protection for 7 days with COC (9 days for Qlaira), IMP, DMPA; 2 days with POP.
Case: ‘I’ve already taken LNG this cycle’
UPA and IUD not an option as there is already a risk of implantation.
Terefore, may use second LNG.1
LNG ‘is not thought to be harmful to the fetus if accidental exposure occurs’.3
Case: ‘I’ve had UPSI earlier this month but didn’t take any EC’
If requested before 5 days afer expected ovulation the IUD would be recommended.1
Sexual Health

-- 518 of 575 --

Extra Notes 	Stopping Contraception
>55 years presumed infertility even if still experiencing menstrual bleeding: may stop contraception.
Non-hormonal method 	≥50 years – afer 1 year of amenorrhoea.1
<50 years – afer 2 years of amenorrhoea.1
Progesterone only 	≥50 years and amenorrhoea for a year.
*If FSH level tests ≥30 IU/L, stop 1 year afer the second raised FSH level.1
LNG-IUS 	Inserted ≥45 years Mirena may be left for contraception and HMB until
55 years.
IUDs (copper) 	Inserted ≥40 years and if Cu-IUD containing ≥300 mm2 copper:
• 	Can retain the device ‘until the menopause’.1
• 	If amenorrhoeic for 1 year consider removing the coil aged 55 years – both
IUS/IUD should not remain indefnitely.1
Progesterone injection 	≥50 years an alternative contraception is advised.1
COCP 	≥50 years an alternative contraception is advised.1
Te POP cannot replace the progesterone in HRT but can be used with combined HRT.1
‘FSH is not a reliable indicator of ovarian failure in women using combined hormones, even if measured
during the hormone-free interval.’1
*Te FSRH advise FSH monitoring may be used for woman on progesterone-only methods. However, as
discussed in the Gynaecology and Breast chapter, Menopause and HRT Learning Points, NICE advise GPs
not to rely on FSH to confrm the menopause in women taking high-dose progesterones.
Sterilisation
What has led to this decision?
How has this decision been made?
What is the risk of regret?
Is the family complete?
Do both partners agree?
Female 	If tubal occlusion is performed at the same time as a caesarean section, counselling and
agreement should be given at least 2 weeks in advance of the procedure.2
Male 	Semen sample at 12 weeks.
A routine second sample is not required if azoospermia in the frst sample.2
➠ 504
Sexual Health

-- 519 of 575 --

CHAPTER 21 OVERVIEW
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse
➠ 505
Cases in this
chapter
Within the RCGP 2020 curriculum:
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance
Misuse
Learning points in this chapter include:
1 	Sleeping
Tablets
‘Recognise that smoking, alcohol
and substance misuse are common
problems in the community and
understand their relationship to disease
and premature death’
Benzodiazepines
2 	Alcohol and
Safeguarding
‘Recognise and manage medical
consequences of smoking, alcohol and
substance misuse’
‘Be aware of wider social issues,
including the need to protect children
and family members from the potential
impact of smoking, alcohol or
substance misuse, and respond to any
safeguarding concerns’
Harmful drinking
Hazardous drinking
Alcohol dependence
Safeguarding
3 	Domestic
Violence
‘Social consequences of substance
misuse, e.g. contact with the
criminal justice system (including
incarceration), domestic violence,
homelessness, poor attendance
or functioning at school or work,
relationship issues, safeguarding
concerns, unemployment’
Domestic violence
Child protection
Coercive controlling behaviour
4 	Opiate Abuse 	‘Identify and offer interventions,
including effective advice and
treatment, to people who smoke or
misuse alcohol or substances’
NICE Guideline CG51. Drug misuse in over
16s: psychosocial interventions. July 2007
5 	Harmful
Drinking
‘Understand that harmful use of
alcohol and other substances is often
unrecognised and can take a range of
forms (including excessive use, binges,
and dependency)’
‘…Medical complications of long-term
alcohol misuse’
NICE Guideline CG115. Alcohol-use
disorders: diagnosis, assessment and
management of harmful drinking (high risk
drinking) and alcohol dependence. February
2011

-- 520 of 575 --

CHAPTER 21 REFERENCES
Sleeping Tablets
1. 	https://www.sleepstation.org.uk
Alcohol and Safeguarding
1. 	NICE Public Health Guideline PH24. Alcohol use disorders: prevention. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph24/
chapter/7-Glossary#harmful-drinking-high-risk-drinking. Jun 2010.
Domestic Violence
1. 	https://www.womensaid.org.uk/information-support/what-is-domestic-abuse/coercive-control/
2. 	Stark E. Coercive Control: How Men Entrap Women in Personal Life. New York: Oxford University Press. 2009.
Opiate Abuse
1. 	NICE Guideline CG51. Drug misuse in over 16s: psychosocial interventions. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
cg51. Jul 2007.
Useful Resources
https://www.crisis.org.uk/ending-homelessness/health-and-wellbeing/drugs-and-alcohol/
https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/healthy-body/ways-to-manage-chronic-pain/
https://livewellwithpain.co.uk/
Harmful Drinking
1. 	NICE Guideline CG115. Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis, assessment and management of harmful drinking (high
risk drinking) and alcohol dependence. https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/CG115. Feb 2011.
2. 	‘Note that the evidence for acamprosate in the treatment of harmful drinkers and people who are mildly alcohol
dependent is less robust than that for naltrexone. At the time of publication (February 2011), acamprosate did not
have UK marketing authorisation for this indication. Informed consent should be obtained and documented.’1
3. 	‘At the time of publication (February 2011), oral naltrexone did not have UK marketing authorisation for this indi-
cation. Informed consent should be obtained and documented.’1
4. 	‘All prescribers should consult the SPC for a full description of the contraindications and the special considerations
of… disulfram.’1
5. 	https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/alcohol-support/tips-on-cutting-down-alcohol/
➠ 506
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse

-- 521 of 575 --

➠ 507
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Ella Jones 	42 years 	F
PMH 	Insomnia
Medications 	Zopiclone 7.5 mg – 14 tablets last prescribed 3 weeks ago.
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 522 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Sleeping Tablets
Open ☐ 	Tell me more about your sleep disturbance … and evening routine? What have you tried?
Impact ☐ 	How does this afect your life? What do you think about when you can’t sleep?
History ☐ 	Tell me about the pressures you are under. How’s life at home? Do you live alone? Are you
active? I see that you were given 2 weeks of tablets 3 weeks ago. You are requiring them
most days?
Flags ☐ 	Is your mood okay? Do you sufer with anxiety? Do you drink much alcohol or cafeine?
How do you feel in the morning? Do you feel groggy when you need to drive?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think may be causing the problem with sleeping? Has anything else happened
or upset you? What worries you about this sleeping problem? Is there anything else on your
mind or anything you have been wondering? Have you had any thoughts regarding what
else you could try?
Sense ☐ 	I hear that you feel you’ve made an informed decision that this is the right thing for you at
present.
Curious ☐ 	I’m thinking longer term also – what are your thoughts about the future plan for these
tablets?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you have always struggled with sleep and, despite trying all the sleep hygiene
advice, only the zopiclone 7.5 mg tablet helps. Without it you fear you cannot get through
the next few months which will be stressful and require your attention. You are hoping to
continue zopiclone on an infrequent basis, as required, as you feel you have no alternative.
Empathy ☐ 	I appreciate it must be horrible not having any sleep. Tis is especially difcult when you
have your level of responsibility at school. You have also followed all the doctor’s advice
diligently.
Impression ☐ 	It sounds as if you sufer with insomnia, exacerbated by recent stress at work.
Experience ☐ 	Can you please explain to me what you know about the risks of these tablets?
Explanation ☐ If I may explain again the risks of these tablets. Even afer a few weeks there is the risk your
body becomes tolerant. Te sleeping tablets are then no longer efective, but increase your
risk of poor concentration, poor memory, poor coordination and low mood. Although
the body has become tolerant, without them you cannot sleep due to the rebound efect of
stopping them abruptly.
InCludE ☐ 	I understand that you feel you cannot be without them, but we need to prevent the pattern
of tolerance then rebound withdrawal. It may take a few weeks of being free from them
before your body fnds its natural rhythm. What are your thoughts about this?
Options ☐ 	We could change the tablet to a longer-acting tablet to avoid withdrawal symptoms; how-
ever, side efects may last all day. How do you think longer-acting tablets may afect you at
work? An alternative is an antihistamine used for insomnia, promethazine, in the interim.
Recommend ☐ To safely wean, I suggest zopiclone 3.75 mg for 2 weeks, then use the 3.75 mg tablets and
promethazine on alternate nights for a week, then change to promethazine only when
required. Is that okay? Do you feel you can try this now?
Future ☐ 	Okay, we could wait until afer Ofsted and then try this in 2 months’ time.
Empower ☐ 	Do you think it’s reasonable to plan that sleeping tablets are not lifelong? I wonder if you
may be interested in CBT… Have you come across this? It is a course designed to help
change patterns of thinking and behaviour and can be efective in insomnia.
You can get an NHS referral to ‘Sleep Station’ which is a CBT service for people with sleep
problems. Should I pop the link in a text to you? Also avoid strenuous exercise in the few
hours before sleep.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever feel sleepy, or your coordination does not feel 100%, you must not drive. If you
ever feel unwell, for example with palpitations or dizziness, this can be due to the tablets,
so please see a doctor. All the best with the next Ofsted meeting.
➠ 508
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 1

-- 523 of 575 --

➠ 509	
Patient’s Story 	Sleeping Tablets
Doctor’s notes Ella Jones, 42 years. PMH: insomnia. Medications: zopiclone 7.5 mg – 14 tablets last pre-
scribed 3 weeks ago.
How to act 	Relaxed but pushy.
You are planning to reassure the doctor that you will be safe with the tablets.
PC 	‘Doctor, I need some more sleeping tablets please. I just need them occasionally.’
History 	You have always been a terrible sleeper and over the past year it has become worse.
You were frst prescribed sleeping tablets 3 months ago.
You were busy at work and they helped. Tese days, you do not sleep without them.
You may manage 3 hours between 3 and 6 a.m. You have a healthy lifestyle and eat well.
You tried the 3.75 mg tablets but these did nothing.
You take the tablet every school night and just put up with the problem at the weekend.
Social 	You are the headmistress of a school. You have just been given bad ratings by Ofsted and
you have further reports to write and further meetings planned in 2 months’ time.
You have no children of your own.
You have a female partner and you are both very happy.
You go to yoga and enjoy playing hockey or going for a run in the evening.
You don’t drink alcohol or cafeine. You relax, read a book and avoid the computer.
ICE 	You are concerned that without the tablets you will not be able to function.
You especially need them at the moment due to the stress at work.
You are worried the doctor will stop giving them to you.
You have tried all the sleep hygiene advice GPs have suggested.
You expect the doctor will be concerned…
‘I thought you may want to counsel me regarding the risks. I appreciate the risks of addiction
but I will only take them when I need them, not every night and it’s really important I have
them please.’
You are happy to negotiate with the doctor.
Suggest afer 2 months you will limit the use to twice weekly.
However, if the doctor explains the risks and understands your situation, agree that you
will try to wean of them completely.
You cannot try a long-acting benzodiazepine as you need to drive and function through
the day.
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 1

-- 524 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Benzodiazepines
Negotiate a plan to reach a mutual agreement.
Wean benzodiazepines (zopiclone may have similar efects) gradually to prevent: anxiety, panic, depression,
palpitations, malaise and seizures.
Withdrawal symptoms may commence up to a week afer stopping longer-acting benzodiazepines. Tis
consultation requires patient education and negotiation afer gaining an understanding of the person’s
individual circumstances.
Converting shorter-acting benzodiazepines (e.g. nitrazepam, temazepam and lorazepam) to longer-acting
benzodiazepines (e.g. diazepam) may be required before initiating a gradual weaning process over a period
of weeks to months depending on the dose. Note some patients may be concerned with using longer-acting
benzodiazepines due to side efects and therefore potential restrictions of driving.
Te BNF contains information regarding withdrawing benzodiazepines (hypnotics and anxiolytics chapter)
including the approximate equivalent doses when compared with diazepam.
Sleep Station1 – CBT for insomnia (CBTi). Patients can register for an NHS referral online and then their
GP completes a form for the patient to access this service free of charge.
See the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk for a useful link to Dose conversions of
benzodiazepines
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 1	
➠ 510

-- 525 of 575 --

➠ 511
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Kirsty West 	38 years 	F
PMH 	No known medical history
Medications 	No current medications
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Simeon West 	42 years 	M
Rose West 	11 years 	F
Toby West 	6 years 	M

-- 526 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Alcohol and Safeguarding
Open ☐ 	Please tell me the story from when this began.
History ☐ 	How is your husband’s health? How is his mood? And how about you? Do you work? Do
you have any close family or friends? Are they aware? Do you drink any alcohol? What has
made you come today; has something happened?
Flags ☐ 	Is there any violence in the home? How have the children reacted? Does your husband
drive? Does your husband take care of the children alone? Does he ever take drugs?
Impact ☐ 	What impact has his drinking had on you? Your relationship? Te children? How are you
coping fnancially?
Sense ☐ 	I can hear how exhausting this is for you.
ICE ☐ 	What has been going through your mind? What makes you feel most upset? Did you have
any hopes of what we may decide today?
Curious ☐ 	You haven’t asked your family for help – I’m wondering why that is. (Pause) Are you close
to them? How may they react? Do you feel there is risk of violence if your husband knew
you were speaking to me?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you are very concerned about the amount your husband is drinking and
the impact this is having on your family. You are worried he won’t fnd work and that home
life will continue to be stressful. You are aware the children are having to make their own
meals and you have felt too embarrassed to inform your parents.
InCludE ☐ 	You were hoping I could speak to your husband. You don’t know what else to do.
Empathy ☐ 	Kirsty, I can hear this is a really difcult situation. You feel the pressure of running the home
is on you and you recognise your husband may be depressed and you want to seek help for
your family.
Impression ☐ 	It sounds as if your husband is drinking a harmful amount; he may be depressed too.
Options ☐ 	To begin with, I could call your husband. You have done the right thing seeking help. Tere
is much that we can do to help your husband: support, medication, counselling and advice.
As a couple, you may also wish to go to relationship counselling. I wonder if your children
need someone to talk to? I am concerned that the children are having to make their own
meals. When any children are involved, I have a duty to inform the safeguarding team,
social services. I can hear you are upset; what is going through your mind?
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about social services?
Explanation ☐ I appreciate this is not what you were expecting but I believe this would be a positive step
toward moving forward. Tis team will be able to provide you with support during this time
of crisis. Social services aim to help families through difcult times and not take children
from their parents. Your husband sounds unwell and it seems you would welcome addi-
tional help. Do I have your support to inform this team so they can contact you to make
their assessment and ofer help?
Empower ☐ 	Would you be able to discuss our conversation with your husband? What do you think he’ll
say? If he will not talk to me on the phone, I could visit. As well as involving your parents,
I wonder if you need a work note so you can either leave work early or have time of work
if you feel you need to relieve this pressure. We have identifed many options today. Out of
these options can you summarise how you would like to proceed? Good!
Specifcs ☐ 	We should talk again with your husband within the week. Which day would suit you? Let’s
book the appointment now.
Safety net ☐ 	If ever you feel there is a risk to anyone, including your husband, contact the police or
your GP.
➠ 512
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 2

-- 527 of 575 --

➠ 513	
Patient’s Story 	Alcohol and Safeguarding
Doctor’s notes Kirsty West, 38 years. PMH: none. Medication: none.
How to act 	Concerned. Articulate. You are mentally and physically well.
PC 	‘Doctor, I want to talk about my husband’s drinking.’
History 	He is in good health but has started drinking half a bottle of whisky every night.
He was made redundant last year and can’t fnd a job. You are worried and angry.
Your life has changed as he has stopped interacting with the children and you feel the
pressure. Your relationship is strained as you are ofen angry with him.
Tere is no violence in the home. You think he is depressed.
You are looking afer the children, running the home as well as bringing in the income.
You are not depressed, ‘just fed up with it’.
Last night he fell over. He was not injured but the children started to cry.
Social 	You work full time in a pharmacy as an assistant and return home at 7 p.m. You drink no
alcohol. Your children are 6 and 11 years old. You have no time for hobbies.
Your family are close by. You’ve felt too embarrassed to tell your parents about the problem.
ICE 	‘I don’t know what to do.’
You are worried he will never get a job now and you can’t see life getting better.
‘Will you come to the house to see him? He may listen to you.’
If the doctor asks to arrange a phone call with your husband, you think this may be helpful.
If asked, you feel the children are starting to become withdrawn and spending more time
in their rooms.
He is not violent. He is home alone with the children afer school and on Saturdays.
He does not drive. Te children return home on the school bus.
He sometimes makes their tea but ofen the older child is making them beans on toast.
If the doctor mentions contacting social services, start to cry. Tell the doctor the children
are safe. Ten suggest you will inform your parents who can look afer the children.
Plead with the doctor not to inform social services and be angry – you have asked for help!
If the doctor asks what you are thinking, say: ‘We are not bad parents.’
If the doctor makes suggestions, a work note for altered hours for you whilst your husband
seeks help or explains why he or she is informing social services, agree you need help. You
accept any suggestions ofered. You believe your husband will accept help when he is aware
of how serious this is.
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 2

-- 528 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Alcohol and Safeguarding
Harmful drinking 	‘A pattern of alcohol consumption that is causing mental or physical damage.’1
Hazardous drinking 	‘A pattern of alcohol consumption that increases someone’s risk of harm. Some would
limit this defnition to the physical or mental health consequences (as in harmful use).
Others would include the social consequences. Te term is currently used by WHO
to describe this pattern of alcohol consumption. It is not a diagnostic term.’1
Alcohol dependence ‘A cluster of behavioural, cognitive and physiological factors that typically include a
strong desire to drink alcohol and difculties in controlling its use. Someone who is
alcohol dependent may persist in drinking, despite harmful consequences. Tey will
also give alcohol a higher priority than other activities and obligations. For further
information, please refer to: ‘Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders’
(DSM-IV) (American Psychiatric Association 2000) and ‘International statistical
classifcation of diseases and related health problems – 10th revision’ (ICD-10) (World
Health Organization 2007)’.1
Safeguarding
Tis case requires the doctor to negotiate speaking to the husband and the safeguarding referral. It can be
difcult to decide when social services should be involved. If you are considering it, it is likely that a referral
is required and, if safe to do so, make your thoughts known to the patient. You may signpost that you will
seek advice from your safeguarding lead and be in touch with the patient/relative again.
Safeguarding teams ask that you gain consent from the parent before making the referral. You can also
proceed without consent if this is not forthcoming.
➠ 514
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 2

-- 529 of 575 --

➠ 515
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Isabel Forster 	33 years 	F
PMH 	Fracture of thumb 1 year ago
Medications 	No known medical history
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	No household members registered

-- 530 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Domestic Violence
Open ☐ 	Okay, what are your thoughts about this?
ICE ☐ 	Have you had thoughts about what may be delaying a pregnancy? Are you worried? What
would you like to happen?
Sense ☐ 	I am sensing David is more concerned about this than you. Is that right?
Curious ☐ 	What discussions have you had as a couple? Do you argue? Do you want to have a baby?
History ☐ 	Are you worried about your health? Do you: take any medicines? Work? Have regular peri-
ods? How ofen do you have sex? Have you ever had an STI? When were you last checked?
What made you have an STI check? How is your relationship now? What else do you argue
about? Do you ever feel unsafe at home? Are you able to tell me more about that? Do you
have any support from family/friends? Can you confde in them? Do you feel isolated? Do
you drink alcohol? Or take drugs? Do you own your house? Do you have your own access
to money? What do you enjoy doing? Would you like to investigate your fertility? Tank
you for sharing this with me.
Flags ☐ 	Questions about David… Does he work? Does he hit you? Has he used objects to hurt
you? Does he force himself on you sexually? Is anyone else aware? Does he spend time
with children? What is he capable of? Do you feel that your life is at risk? Has he ever been
arrested? Has he threatened to kill you or someone else? Does he have any mental health
problems? How much alcohol does he drink? What about drugs? Tank you for telling me.
I appreciate it must be upsetting to talk about. Is the abuse getting worse? Do you feel he
is controlling you? How is your mood? Do you ever have thoughts that life is not worth
living? Have you ever tried to self-harm or commit suicide? Have you ever made plans to?
Do you have any other injuries? Has he harmed himself? Have you tried to leave before?
Impact ☐ 	How do the violence and unkind words you receive afect you?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, David is keen for a family but because of the violence in the relationship
you are taking the Depo injection to give you time to think about your options.
Impression ☐ 	It sounds like you do not feel safe in your home and David’s behaviour could be described
as coercive and controlling.
Explanation ☐ Violence in the home is just as illegal as violence in the streets.
Empathy ☐ 	Tis must be very difcult for you to talk about. It can also be frightening telling someone.
ICE ☐ 	What are your thoughts about your options? What would you like to happen? Are you
starting to think about planning to leave? What frightens you? What do you need? Have
you thought about telling the police?
Experience ☐ 	Have you heard of any support groups? Are there family/friends who may be able to help?
Recommend ☐ I recommend that I see you. Could you tell David you are attending the surgery for an
examination or blood test if I booked an appointment for you? I can give you informa-
tion about sources of help. If you are thinking of leaving there are a lot of people who can
help: Domestic Violence helpline, Women’s Aid, Freedom Programme, Recovery Toolkit,
Sanctuary Scheme.
Empower ☐ 	We need to give you control back. Have a think about what steps you would like to take.
Future ☐ 	Would you like to meet tomorrow? I could give you a sticker which looks like a barcode
which has a crisis number on it – put it on something like a lipstick. What will you tell
David?
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever feel you need help you could call this number, us, 111 or the police.
➠ 516
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 3

-- 531 of 575 --

➠ 517	
Patient’s Story 	Domestic Violence
Doctor’s notes Isabel Forster, 33 years. PMH: fracture of thumb 1 year ago. Medications: none.
How to act 	Very quiet. You have a concern that you have not shared with anyone else.
PC 	‘Doctor, we’ve been trying for a baby for over a year now.’
History 	You are well. Fracture of the thumb afer you tripped 1 year ago.
You have regular periods. No STIs and smears are up to date.
You have had no other sexual relationships since this relationship with David.
‘David thought I should call. He is at work.’
‘He thinks something must be wrong.’
Social 	You met David 4 years ago. You work in the kitchen of the local primary school.
David is a building manager for large corporation sites. He has no children.
You drink no alcohol and take no drugs. David drinks ‘too much’ alcohol.
ICE 	You tell the doctor it is likely that you haven’t fallen pregnant because David is ofen at work
or you have been busy around the time of ovulation.
‘I’m not worried. I know it takes time. I’m not sure now is the right time anyway.’
‘We argue about it.’ If asked why, say you feel you should wait until you have bought a house.
‘I thought maybe have some blood tests, that is what David would like.’
If the doctor responds to cues or senses that there is more you want to tell
him or her…
‘David sometimes hurts me.’ You have been taking the contraceptive injection every 3 months at family
planning since your coil was removed 1 year ago. You would like to leave the relationship but you are waiting
for the right time. You have no concerns about your health. You had a GUM check 6 months ago because
you were concerned David may have had an afair. It was normal. David drinks large amounts afer work.
He says hurtful things, e.g. that you are fat and ugly. He has never used a weapon and has never hurt another
person or animal. He sometimes apologises and can be very loving. He takes no drugs. He has no access to
children. He has never been involved with the police. He doesn’t drink and drive. You do not feel he would
kill anyone including yourself. You want to start thinking about ending the relationship. You tried before
and he got very angry then very remorseful and loving. You were scared and you stayed. He is controlling.
He pushes himself on you for sex but you do not resist. You need time to think about how and when to leave.
One year ago, you broke your thumb afer he pushed you into a radiator. Your mood is okay. You have lived
with his aggression for years. You have never had suicidal thoughts. You have a best friend whom you may
now tell. You have no money. You don’t know where you would go or how you would pay for rent if you lost
your job. You will lie to him and say you have an appointment next week for blood tests.
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 3

-- 532 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Domestic Violence
Opportunities to discuss domestic violence
Asking about relationships is part of any social history. Te doctor should always be prepared to sensitively
ask about DV if there are any concerns or it crosses the doctor’s mind.
Tere are many opportunities to ask about DV: injury, pregnancy, contraception, pain (e.g. abdominal) and
repeated minor illness.
Raising DV 	‘Tell me more about your relationship. Do you ofen argue?’
‘Does he/she ever say or do anything that upsets you?’
‘Do you ever feel threatened by anyone at home?’
‘Is there any violence at home?’
Be aware of your local support groups for DV.
Child protection
Establish whether there was a child protection concern:
‘Does he/she have any contact with children?’
‘Do any children witness the violence?’
‘Has a child been hurt?’
‘How are the children getting on?’
‘How are they getting on at school?’
‘Is there any pet abuse?’
Ensure immediate reporting to the local safeguarding team if another adult or child is at risk. When children
are in the home, even if the parent/guardian feels the children are not afected by the violence, they almost
always are in some way and so reporting to the local safeguarding team should be discussed.
Suggestions of how to approach a consultation if the person presenting is the perpetrator, not the victim:
‘You have honestly explained when you feel angry you …’
‘And recognise this is serious.’
‘It sounds as if you would like to receive help for this?’
‘What thoughts have you had?’
‘We have local teams… e.g. Give Respect – here is their number.’
‘May I ask you to see me again and follow this up …?’
‘Could you bring your husband/wife with you next time?’
Do not collude or offer relationship counselling
Coercive controlling behaviour (CCB)1
As well as asking about DV, the doctor should be aware of the possibility of CCB – which is emotional abuse
that is damaging to the mental health of the victim and is illegal in the UK. In the above consultation, there
is evidence of CCB as well as DV. David says hurtful things, he is controlling, he became angry when Isabel
wanted to leave and he forces sex. Some features of CCB include:
• 	Controlling aspects of another’s life – where they go, who they can meet.
• 	Repeated ‘put-downs’ – ‘You’re fat and ugly’.
• 	Controlling fnances or access to money.
• 	Humiliating or degrading behaviour.
• 	‘Gaslighting’, e.g. hiding things, denying something that’s been said, telling lies so that the victim starts
to question their own reality and even thinks they are losing their mind.
‘Te victim becomes captive in an unreal world created by the abuser, entrapped in a world of confusion,
contradiction and fear.’ Professor Evan Stark.2
➠ 518
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 3

-- 533 of 575 --

➠ 519
Doctor’s Notes
Patient 	Michaela Butt 	32 years 	F
PMH 	2 NVDs – 2 and 3 years ago
Postnatal depression
Sciatica
Referred to the spinal team and now discharged to physiotherapy.
MRI 6 months ago showed minor degenerative changes only.
DNA last physiotherapy appointment.
Medications 	Morphine sulphate M/R 30 mg BD. Last issued 60 tablets 20 days
ago.
Oramorph 10 mg/5 mL
Codeine 30 mg
Allergies 	No information
Consultations 	No recent consultations
Investigations 	No recent investigations
Household 	Neil Butt 	38 years 	M
Jasmine Butt 	3 years 	F
Joseph Butt 	2 years 	M

-- 534 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Opiate Abuse
Open ☐ 	Tell me more about the pain from when it began. And the nature of the pain? Have you noticed
any other symptoms? Tell me exactly how and when you take each of your medicines.
Impact ☐ 	What impact has the pain had on life? What can you no longer do?
History ☐ 	What makes the pain worse? Looking at your history, I see you had depression? How is your
mood now? How do you spend your days? Who is at home with you? What can you do yourself?
Do you drink alcohol? Have your symptoms changed over recent months?
Flags ☐ 	Have you injured your back? Does the pain wake you? Is there weakness in your legs? Do you
lose control of going to the toilet? Have you lost weight? Are you running any fevers?
ICE ☐ 	What are your thoughts regarding the cause of your back pain? How can we make progress?
What do you think stops your back from recovering? What are you most worried about?
What did you think we may decide?
Experience ☐ 	What is your understanding of what they found on the MRI?
Sense ☐ 	Do you feel angry? Tell me more about why.
Curious ☐ 	Do you see things getting better in the future? Did you enjoy being able to do more in the past?
Why would going to work make you depressed? Do you fear becoming depressed again? What
stress do you have in your life?
SummarICE ☐ 	It sounds as if you have made great progress with your mood but your back prevents you from
living an active life. You fear that going back to work would make your back worse and make you
ill again with depression. You haven’t done the exercises and didn’t attend your physiotherapy
as this all increases the pain.
Impression ☐ 	You have a small amount of wear and tear in your back, as seen on the MRI. However, it seems
you have developed chronic pain relating to this.
Explanation ☐ 	Chronic pain is pain which lasts many months when it would be expected that the tissue should
have healed and pain improved. It tends to involve diferent processes in the brain and spinal
cord compared with acute pain such as twisting your ankle. Research shows tablets for chronic
pain aren’t that efective and can do harm. It’s a worry how much pain relief you require. We
obviously need to change how we help you. I am concerned you have become addicted to your
medication and this has led you to take more. Do you think this is possible?
Empathy ☐ 	You are in a lot of pain and have had a difcult couple of years. I want to help you today but also
aim to get you better in the long term. Is this something you could work towards with me?
Recommend ☐ I recommend we prescribe you tablets on repeat but 2 weeks at a time and you will not be able
to collect the tablets early. Tis will help to prevent you taking too many. Over time I would like
you to start weaning of your medication, particularly as you feel they haven’t been that efective.
Does that sound okay? You should not be on both codeine and morphine. To help I will add
paracetamol. I appreciate that paracetamol alone doesn’t help but it works with the morphine.
Have you tried an anti-infammatory – ibuprofen or naproxen? Did you try an additional tablet
with this called omeprazole to help avoid side efects? Would you like to try that again but with
omeperazole? It may help reduce any infammation. May I text you a link to a website which
helps people with chronic pain? It helps you to understand how chronic pain happens and how
you can beat it? It’s called ‘live well with pain’.
Empower ☐ 	It is important to keep your back moving. What steps could you take towards getting back to
your previous activities? Could you try the exercises half an hour afer you have taken some
Oramorph? Tey may make you feel stif at frst but then you should start to see an improvement.
Don’t be frightened of the pain, it is unlikely you will make your back worse. Do you think you
could try yoga or Pilates which will help your core muscle strength, fexibility and aid relaxation?
Would you be interested in therapy which helps you feel stronger when you have been worried,
called CBT?
Future ☐ 	Can you call me in 1 month? If we are not winning, we could consider referring you to the pain
team? May I refer you back to physiotherapy? Please attend, otherwise this is an appointment
which someone else could have.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever lose control of the bowels or bladder, you need to see a doctor straight away.
With the plan you have made I’m confdent we will make progress.
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 4	
➠ 520

-- 535 of 575 --

➠ 521	
Patient’s Story 	Opiate Abuse
Doctor’s notes Michaela Butt, 32 years. PMH: 2 NVDs – 2 and 3 years ago. Postnatal depression.
Sciatica. Referred to the spinal team and now discharged to physiotherapy. MRI 6 months
ago showed minor degenerative changes only. DNA last physiotherapy appointment.
Medications: morphine sulphate M/R 30 mg BD. Last issued 60 tablets 20 days ago,
Oramorph 10 mg/5 mL, codeine 30 mg.
How to act 	Demanding.
PC 	‘I need more tablets. I lost the others.’
History 	You stopped working in the local care home when you had children.
During your pregnancy you sufered with sciatica and pelvic pain.
You have had no injuries. Tere are no back pain red fags.
‘Lifing the kids’ makes it worse.
You have an uncomfortable bed and can’t aford a new one.
You sufered with postnatal depression. You were seen by the postnatal depression team
and you were discharged afer your medications stopped.
You are feeling mentally well now.
Your sciatica pain was ongoing afer the delivery and you have gradually had to increase
your pain relief. Te pain radiates down both legs.
You have no neurological symptoms.
You’re annoyed the MRI scan didn’t show anything.
‘No one knows what is causing it.’
You had an appointment with the spinal team who discharged you to physiotherapy.
You do not do the exercises at home as they hurt your back.
You take occasional codeine.
You take your Oramorph twice a day and sometimes take an additional morphine tablet.
You missed your last physiotherapy appointment.
Social 	Your husband doesn’t work. He has to look afer the 2 children.
You are both on income support. You do not smoke or drink alcohol.
Your husband does the housework. You make the meals.
ICE 	You would like more morphine tablets.
You believe the doctors don’t know what the problem is.
You are not worried, only that the doctor may tell you to stop taking so many tablets.
Refuse any NSAID – they don’t work and make you feel sick.
You did not try it with a PPI and agree to this if ofered.
You can’t see your back getting better.
You will have to spend your life on these tablets.
You can’t do anything due to the pain.
If the doctor tells you not to take extra morphine, say: ‘I obviously need more.’
If the doctor asks about work, the thought of going back to work flls you with dread. Having
to get up on cold mornings with a painful back.
‘If you make me go back to work, I will become depressed again.’
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 4

-- 536 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Opiate Abuse
During every contact it is important to build a rapport and work together towards set goals. NICE stresses
the importance of respecting the patient and ofering continuity of support. Also take every opportunity to
provide education for the services available.
Using a motivational interview strategy may be helpful. NICE encourages the patient to identify vulnerable
situations where they may be at risk of substance misuse and equips the patient with coping strategies for
these challenges. Consider Read Coding the patient as a vulnerable adult and enquire if there are safe-
guarding concerns in the home.
Coping strategies include self-help (which may be from CBT) as well as help from agencies. Make sure
ongoing support is available as well as support in times of crisis.
If patients are asking for more tramadol or codeine tablets than the maximum allowed dose try… ‘I cannot
prescribe more than eight tablets a day as I would be prescribing an overdose. Instead, we need to decide together
whether this is the correct medication for you.’
Consider a diferent working diagnosis and psychosocial reasons why the amount of pain the patient is expe-
riencing seems disproportionate to the suspected cause. Consider a referral to the pain clinic or the drug and
alcohol team if you feel there is drug misuse or abuse. Tere are some tactics you can employ to help keep
control of opiate prescribing in patients where there is a concern regarding opiate abuse (e.g. drug-seeking
behaviour or PMH of illegal drug use). Prescribe in small quantities, e.g. weekly scripts. Tis will help you
monitor use, reduce the risk of overdose and, when patients claim to have ‘lost’ a prescription, they will only
have to wait a few days before another can be issued – rather than twisting your arm as they can’t manage 3
weeks without the medication. Avoid using long-acting opiates in patients who may still be using intravenous
drugs. Tese increase the risk of overdose as a patient may forget they are wearing a patch or have taken M/R
oral opiates when they use drugs intravenously. Always get help from an experienced drug/alcohol team as
such patients are notoriously difcult to manage. Using patient warnings/pop-ups on the electronic record
can also highlight risk of opiate misuse to colleagues who may be unfamiliar with the patient.
Know your local services. Mentioning these services in your consultation skills exam will enhance your
management plan.
‘Ensure that maintaining the service user’s engagement with services remains a major focus of the care plan.’1
For example, in Oxford, services include:
• 	GPs with training in drug and alcohol management
• 	Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
• 	Evolve for young people
• 	FRANK
• 	Narcotic Anonymous (NA)
• 	Oxfordshire DAAT (Drug and Alcohol Action Team)
• 	SMART or SMART (DIP)
• 	SWOP Scheme
• 	Te Women’s Service or Women’s Initiative on Street Health
Find out if you have social prescribing coordinators locally to help guide patients in the right direction
for community and professional support. Ask them to send you their directory of local services for you to
peruse at your leisure – an investment in time!
If you do not have this service, are you struggling to think of a quality improvement project (QIP)? Why not
research local services and ask your colleagues for services they use, form a directory and email it to local
practices and the PCN with a social prescribing proposal for your practice. Voilà!
➠ 522
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 4

-- 537 of 575 --

➠ 523
Doctor’s Notes
Patient
PMH
Medications
Allergies
Consultations
Investigations
Household
Katherine Knight 	68 years
No medical history
None
No information
No recent consultations
No recent investigations
Barry Knight 	63 years
F
M

-- 538 of 575 --

Example Consultation 	Harmful Drinking
Open ☐ 	What’s prompted calling me today? Tell me about your drinking pattern. How do you feel about
it?
History ☐ 	Do you drink in the morning? Alone? Are you in good health? Any medicines? Any physical
symptoms? Tremors? Stomach changes? Sleep problems? What do you do each day? Tell me
about home life. Have you ever not done something expected of you due to drinking? Have you
ever started drinking and felt you couldn’t stop?
Impact ☐ 	How has this afected your life? Or relationships? Or hobbies?
ICE ☐ 	What do you think has led to this? What else have you been wondering? Have you known anyone
else who struggled with alcohol? What worries do you have? What did you think we may decide
today?
Sense ☐ 	You seem very sad. I’m interested to know why. Are there people you are close to?
Risk ☐ 	Do you feel isolated? Have you had any mental health problems/depression? Do you take any
drugs?
Flags ☐ 	Are there any dangers you can see associated with drinking? Any injuries? Are you down?
Any thoughts of life not worth living? Have you acted on them? Do you have plans to end your
life? Are either of you violent or unkind? Have you had thoughts of hurting another person? Do
you eat well and look afer yourself? Do you drive?
Curious ☐ 	What does your husband think about the alcohol? And the relationship? Has it had an impact
on him?
Empathy ☐ 	You’ve taken a big step today. It must seem like a difcult journey ahead.
Empower ☐ 	We can help. How would life be diferent without alcohol? Do you think you can stop? What
steps could you take? Why might it be difcult? Who could help? What is your aim? When would
you like to achieve that by?
SummarICE ☐ 	To summarise, you’ve been increasing your consumption of alcohol over 6 months. You feel low
and this is due to being alone and bored. You hope to cut down and spend more time with your
husband.
Impression ☐ 	It sounds like you have alcohol dependence and depression.
Experience ☐ 	What do you know about why alcohol is dangerous?
Explanation ☐ 	Alcohol afects most parts of the body. As well as damage to the liver it can cause problems with
the nerves and the functioning in the brain. Sometimes people can sufer with a dementia-like
illness because of alcohol. Alcohol keeps you awake at night. Alcohol is a false friend; it makes
you more depressed.
Options ☐ 	Tere are things that you can do. It is actually dangerous to stop drinking straight away. We
should either cut down gradually or provide support through a detox programme. What are
your thoughts about these options?
Recommend ☐ Reducing your alcohol intake by 2–3 units (a large glass of wine) per day is a good starting
point. Others can help with your recovery. Your husband, the alcohol team or Turning Point
can support you through the process and aferwards. Would you be interested in seeing these
teams? I would also suggest that I see you in the surgery to examine your tummy, to check the
size of your liver, and look for any other sign of alcohol afecting your body. Would that be okay?
We could also arrange some blood tests to look for harm as well – specifcally your blood count
and liver tests? I would like to give you some vitamin tablets – thiamine – which will prevent
you becoming confused and unwell. Te dose is one 100 mg tablet daily. How does this sound?
Future ☐ 	I will ask reception to call you back with an appointment for your blood tests then I will see you
in surgery to discuss the results and examine you, is that okay? You may also want to attend AA
for ongoing support. Tere is also Relate which ofers relationship counselling – you may fnd
this helpful. What are your thoughts? I can write down these contacts.
Safety net ☐ 	If you ever feel you are muddled, or start vomiting or feel shaky or generally unwell, or have
thoughts of wanting to hurt yourself or anyone else, please see a doctor straight away. I’m looking
forward to seeing you next week.
➠ 524
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 5

-- 539 of 575 --

➠ 525	
Patient’s Story 	Harmful Drinking
Doctor’s notes Katherine Knight, 68 years. PMH: none. Medication: none.
How to act 	Speak quietly. Do not be forthcoming with information.
PC 	‘My husband thinks I’m drinking too much.’
History 	You started to drink one bottle of wine every night about 6 months ago.
You just enjoyed it and the amount gradually increased.
You are bored and don’t have anything else to do!
As well as the wine, you sometimes also have a brandy or two, usually starting to drink at
lunchtime. If you don’t drink, you feel shaky and you drink every day. You take no drugs.
Your health has always been good and you take no medicines. You have no physical symp-
toms that you know of and your bowels are fne but your appetite is reduced. You ofen
wake through the night.
When others mention the alcohol, you feel upset. You drink alone and your husband has
stopped drinking ‘to make me feel guilty’.
Social 	You spend the day watching TV or you may wander to the supermarket.
You eat quick meals these days and don’t feel like cooking.
You have never driven a car.
Your husband is still working as a caretaker. ‘He is too busy to notice.’
You have lost touch with friends. You missed a catch-up with a friend as you’d been drinking
and fell asleep on the sofa.
ICE 	Your husband told you to speak to your GP.
Your relationship is not good. He is becoming upset.
He is polite and kind to you but you feel very alone. You regret not having children.
You wanted to talk to the GP today but are unsure what you want from the meeting.
You are worried that you rely on the alcohol and you don’t know how to cut down.
Although you would like to cut down, boredom may prevent it.
However, overall, you believe you can and know your husband will help you.
You think you are depressed but want no medication.
You have occasional thoughts that life is not worth living but no plans and you would not
attempt suicide.
You would like to get out of the house more. You would like to do more things together.
You agree with the doctor’s advice about your relationship and self-help measures.
You understand that alcohol is bad for the liver.
Examination 	Te examination is normal.
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 5

-- 540 of 575 --

Learning Points 	Harmful Drinking1
Perform a risk assessment 	Self (neglect, harm, suicide, injury)
Others (the public, children/vulnerable adults)
Assess psychological and social problems
e.g. mental health problems, work issues, housing issues, driving, criminal activity, relationship problems.
Investigations 	U&E, LFT, GGT, FBC and clotting
Questionnaires 	AUDIT, SADQ and APQ
Divide who can help into self, GP and others (friends, professionals or support groups: AA or SMART
recovery). Involve families and carers in the recovery process with the patient’s consent.
Consider the addition of acamprosate2 or naltrexone3 to psychological therapy if this therapy alone has not
been successful in mild alcohol dependence.1 In practice, for most GPs, this will require a referral to the
local drug and alcohol team.
When to offer community detox programmes
For those who ‘drink over 15 units of alcohol per day and/or who score 20 or more on the AUDIT, consider
ofering: an assessment for and delivery of a community-based assisted withdrawal, or assessment and
management in specialist alcohol services if there are safety concerns… ’1
When to consider inpatient or residential assisted withdrawal1
15–30 units/day 	and ‘signifcant psychiatric or physical comorbidities…
or a signifcant learning disability or cognitive impairment’1
SADQ score 	>30
History of: 	epilepsy
withdrawal-related seizures
delirium tremens
consuming alcohol and benzodiazepines.
‘Consider a lower threshold for inpatient or residential assisted withdrawal in vulnerable groups, for exam-
ple, homeless and older people.’1
‘Afer a successful withdrawal for people with moderate and severe alcohol dependence consider ofering
acamprosate2 or oral naltrexone3 in combination with an individual psychological intervention or (3rd line)
disulfram4 afer explaining the risks.’1
Advise patients wanting to cut down that this should be done slowly to prevent withdrawal symptoms and
explain the importance of this to patients. If withdrawal symptoms start to develop, the patient can drink
2 units of alcohol and wait 30 minutes to see the response.5
Remember driving – the law requires all dependent drinkers to inform the DVLA.
➠ 526
Smoking, Alcohol and Substance Misuse – 5

-- 541 of 575 --

➠ 527
CHAPTER 22 EXAMINATION CHECKLISTS
Examinations
Informed Consent
To gain informed consent explain what you would like to do and why it would be helpful.
‘I would like to examine your chest by bringing you to the examination couch. It would be helpful if you could
please remove your top (keeping your bra on) and then I’d like to take your temperature, feel your pulse and
have a listen to your chest to see if there are any signs of infection. Would that be okay?’
If an intimate examination is required then either state you need a chaperone or, if you feel comfortable
without, ofer a chaperone. (In real consultations always document this discussion.)
Simulated cases’ assessment
You need to inform the patient of everything you would like to examine just in case you do not have the
opportunity to carry out the examination. Do not turn to look at the examiner to ask if you should examine!
Presume you are proceeding with the examination (even if an intimate examination) and move afer gaining
consent to either a chair or couch as appropriate. You may be stopped and given information (by card, on
the iPad or verbally) at this point.
Be aware you may be signposted to a second page on the iPad with further information.
Candidates ofen ask:
1. Should I examine in the chair or on the couch?
Te chair is acceptable if you can obtain all the information you require without cutting corners, e.g.
for a thyroid assessment. However, this is your higher level exam and therefore we recommend you
demonstrate excellent skills. E.g. on the couch for a cardiovascular assessment.
2. Should I complete a thorough and formal examination of a system?
Te extent to which you examine should be appropriate and guided by the history, e.g. if a patient pre-
sents with angina, we suggest a formal/full approach to the cardiovascular examination.
When examining, always use the phrase a ‘good look’ not a ‘quick look’.
Recorded consultation assessment (RCA)
In a face-to-face consultation, examine the patient when it is clinically appropriate to do so. Remember the
‘rules’, already described in Chapter 1.
• 	Be sure that you are examining for the beneft of the patient, not the examiner. Never ‘stage’ an exami-
nation that is not necessary.
Examine behind the curtain, of camera, if removing clothing, or if the examination requires exposure
in the ‘swimsuit area’, i.e. the area normally covered by swim shorts for males ≥ 2 years, bikini area for
females ≥ 2 years and nappy area for an under 2-year-old.
• 	Describe what you are doing, for the beneft of the patient, and the examiner will also be able to hear
this commentary. Be sure that you use language that the patient will understand.
• 	Do not stop or edit the tape.

-- 542 of 575 --

Examinations 	Cardiovascular
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your chest and heart by asking you to come over to the couch and take of your
top, please. I will then feel your pulse, take your blood pressure and listen to your heart. Tis will help me to
check the heart and blood vessels. Is that okay?’
Checklist
• 	‘I’d like to start by measuring your blood pressure and checking your pulse.’
• 	‘Now may I feel both pulses together?’
• 	‘May I see your hands?’
• 	‘And now just the one pulse and I will lif your arm.’ (Collapsing pulse.)
• 	‘Look up to the ceiling for me… and stick out your tongue.’ (Anaemia.)
• 	‘Now please turn your neck to the side.’ (JVP – if appropriate from history.)
• 	‘May I feel your heart?’ (Apex, thrills and heaves.)
• 	‘Now I’ll listen.’ (Apex with bell for mitral stenosis.)
• 	‘And now please roll slightly to your lef.’ (Mitral regurgitation.)
• 	‘Please roll back.’ Switch to diaphragm to check the other valves.
• 	‘I will now listen to the arteries in your neck.’ (Carotid bruit.)
• 	‘Now please sit forward.’ (Listen for aortic regurgitation at lef lower sternal edge.)
• 	‘I will now listen to your lower lungs.’ (Pulmonary oedema – if appropriate from history.)
• 	Consider checking for liver edge and leg swelling. (Right-sided heart failure.)
• 	Consider checking for AAA and peripheral pulses. (Depending on age and history.)
➠ 528
Examinations

-- 543 of 575 --

Examinations
➠ 529	
Examinations 	Respiratory
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your chest and lungs in the chair and will ask you to take of your top, please.
I’d also like to feel your pulse, check your breathing rate, oxygen levels, take your temperature and check a
blowing test called the peak fow. Tis will help me look for signs of infection and check the airfow into lungs.
Is that okay?’
Checklist
• 	‘I’d like to start by checking your pulse and oxygen saturations.’
• 	Ten check breathing rate.
• 	‘Please may I see your hands and fngers?’
• 	‘Can you please stick out your tongue?’ (Cyanosis.)
• 	‘I’m going to feel for lumps in the neck.’ (Lymphadenopathy.)
• 	‘Big breath in for me.’ (Expansion.)
• 	‘And say 99.’ (Vocal resonance in quadrants.)
• 	‘And now some deep breaths in and out please.’ (Auscultation.)
• 	‘I’m going to tap on your chest.’ (Percussion.)
• 	‘Can I just check your legs for pain and swelling?’ (DVT.)
• 	Consider temperature.
• 	Consider PEFR.
• 	Consider inhaler technique.

-- 544 of 575 --

Examinations
Examinations 	Abdominal
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your abdomen, by asking you to lie on the couch and lif up your top to under
the breasts and undo the button on your trousers to look at your lower tummy. I would also like to take your
pulse and temperature. Tis will help me to fnd the reason for your pain. Is that okay?’
Checklist
• 	Consider taking: pulse, temperature and blood pressure. (Are they systemically unwell?)
• 	‘May I see your hands and fngers?’ (E.g. liver disease.)
• 	‘I’m just going to have a close look at your face and eyes for colour change.’
• 	‘May I look in your mouth?’
• 	‘I’m just going to feel for any lumps above your collar bone.’
• 	‘Can you please lif your head of the bed and cough?’ (Hernia.)
• 	‘Can you suck your tummy in?’ (Peritonism.)
• 	‘Please tell me if you have any discomfort whilst I feel your tummy.’ (Watch their face.)
• 	Check for rebound tenderness, McBurney’s and Rovsing’s signs.
• 	Palpate for hepatosplenomegaly.
• 	Ten percuss for hepatosplenomegaly and consider shifing dullness for ascites.
• 	Auscultate.
• 	Consider ofering: inguinal hernia, perineum, pelvic and rectal examinations.
• 	Consider requesting a urine sample for a pregnancy or urine dipstick test.
➠ 530

-- 545 of 575 --

Examinations
➠ 531	
Examinations 	Cranial Nerves
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine the nerves in your brain by asking you to make some actions. I will sit opposite
you. Is that okay?’
Checklist
II 	‘Can you read this chart covering each eye at a time.’ (Snellen for acuity.)
‘Look at my fnger at a distance and now close to your nose.’ (Accommodation.)
‘Now I’ll shine a light in your eye.’ (Ten the opposite eye for eferent/aferent pathway testing.)
‘Covering the lef eye with your hand, look at my nose. Say yes when you see my fngers move.’
‘And now cover the other eye.’ (Visual felds.)
‘Now with both eyes open how many fngers do you see?’ (Double vision/4 quadrants.)
Fundoscopy: ‘Now I’d like to look at the back of your eyes. Tis involves shining a bright
light into the eye. I will need to get close to your face, please try to keep looking straight for-
ward – imagine you can see through me, and remember to breathe away normally.’
III, IV, VI 	‘Now keep your head still and follow my finger with your eyes.’ (Eye movements and
nystagmus.)
V 	‘Checking for sensation now: can you feel this on both sides?’ (Upper, middle and lower face.)
VII 	‘Now I’m going to test the muscles. I will test the strength by resisting your movements.’
‘Please raise your eyebrows… now shut your eyes tight…’
‘Open your eyes and puf out your cheeks… and a big smile for me.’
VIII 	‘Can you hear me whisper a number?’ Block the opposite ear, test each side at 1 m whisper.
If not heard, try 1 m voice… if not heard try voice next to ear.
Rinne/Weber if difculty hearing (see ENT examinations).
IX 	‘Please swallow.’
X 	‘Open your mouth and say ah.’ (Palatal rise.)
XI 	‘Shrug your shoulders and keep them up… and push your face against my hand’ (Check ster-
nocleidomastoid muscle strength.)
XII 	‘Please show me your tongue.’
Cerebellar acronym – DANISH: Dysdiadochokinesia. Ataxic gait. Nystagmus. Intention tremor. Slurred
speech ‘baby hippopotamus’ and heel–shin test (coordination).

-- 546 of 575 --

Examinations
Examinations 	Neurological
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine the nerves in your arms and legs by checking sensation and doing some move-
ments. Is that okay?
Do you have any pain that I should be aware of when I examine you?’
Decide bed or chair – what do you do normally? Tink about the exposure of the patient. It may be appro-
priate to leave clothes on if sensation can be tested easily through thin clothing.
Checklist
• 	‘Are you able to stand up without using your hands?... Now please walk across the room and back.’ (‘Get
up and go’ in the elderly to assess falls risk, gait and strength.)
• 	‘Can you stand feet together and then shut your eyes.’ (Romberg’s for proprioception – be ready to steady
the patient should they lose balance!)
• 	‘And now with your feet comfortably apart again, close your eyes and touch your nose.’
• 	‘Can you walk heel–toe?... And now please lie down on the bed facing upwards.’
• 	Check arms +/– legs for wasting, scars, fasciculation.
• 	‘I’m going to check the tone by moving your arms.’
• 	‘Can we now check power… and refexes?’
• 	‘And now your legs.’
• 	‘A scratch test on your feet now.’ (Plantar refexes and check clonus.)
• 	‘I’m going to test your sensation.’ Demonstrate pins and cotton wool on the chest and then check all
dermatomes.
• 	Test coordination – fnger nose ataxia/heel against shin.
• 	Consider vibration sensation. (Peripheral neuropathy secondary to diabetes.)
• 	Consider cerebellar signs (DANISH – see CN examination.)
• 	Consider testing for parkinsonism features: micrographia, each fnger to thumb, hands open and closing
for bradykinesia.
➠ 532

-- 547 of 575 --

Examinations
➠ 533	
Examinations 	Thyroid/Neck
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your thyroid gland, which is in the neck, and also look at your hands and legs
which can be afected by the thyroid, if I may?’
Patient in sitting position and expose neck fully.
Checklist
• 	‘May I start by looking at your hands?’ (Tremor, warmth, palmar erythema, dry skin, clubbing.)
• 	‘And check your pulse?’
• 	‘Looking at your eyes now, can you look straight ahead… follow my fnger up and down? (Exophthalmos,
lid retraction, lid lag, chemosis.)
• 	‘And now looking at your neck.’ (Look from the front and side for scars and a visible thyroid.)
• 	‘Can you please stick out your tongue… and now swallow?’
• 	‘I’m going to feel your thyroid… and, if you can, please swallow again.’ (Stand behind. ?Asymmetry.)
• 	‘I’m going to listen.’ (Bruit.)
• 	‘Now looking at your ankles for swelling. (Pre-tibial myxoedema.)
• 	‘And fnally testing your refexes.’ (Slow relaxing refexes.)
• 	‘May I check your weight now please?’

-- 548 of 575 --

Examinations
Examinations 	Shoulder/Cervical Spine
• 	Look → feel → move → power → sensation → function.
• 	Always examine the joint above and below for swelling, tenderness and ROM.
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your shoulders, neck and elbow. May I ask you to take your shirt of please?
Is that okay?’
Checklist
• 	‘Can you please point to where you feel the pain?’
• 	Look for asymmetry, deformity, wasting, swelling or redness.
• 	‘Please tell me if you are tender or in pain when I examine you.’ (Warmth/tenderness over C-spine,
shoulder and elbow.)
• 	‘Can you move your neck and copy me?’ (Test for full ROM of the neck.)
• 	Keeping your arms straight, can you lif the arms up in front of you… and now move the arms out to
the sides and lif the arms into the air?’ (Painful arc or frozen shoulder?)
• 	‘Put your arms out to the sides but just a little in front of you. Now imagine you are holding a can and
emptying it onto the foor. Now please hold your arm in that position whilst I try to push your arm
down.’ (Jobe’s test/empty can test = supraspinatus test.)
• 	‘Now glue both elbows into your waist but with your hands push my hands out to the sides.’ (External
rotation for teres minor test.)
• 	‘Can you hold your hand out so your thumb is up and tilted away from you? Now can you try and turn
your hand further away from you against my resistance?’ (Infraspinatus test.)
• 	‘Hands behind your back and push my hands backwards.’ (Subscapularis test.)
• 	Ten fnally test power throughout the upper limb.
• 	Consider a neuro exam. ‘Can you feel me touch your skin?’ (Test all dermatomes.)
• 	‘How high up your spine can you reach there?’ (Function.)
• 	‘Can you touch your head with both hands as if washing your hair?’ (Function.)
• 	‘Any issues checking your blind spot when driving?’ (Function.)
➠ 534

-- 549 of 575 --

Examinations
➠ 535	
Examinations 	Elbow
• 	Look → feel → move → power → sensation → function.
• 	Always examine joint above and joint below for swelling, tenderness and ROM.
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your elbow as well as your shoulder and wrists. If I may ask you to remove
your shirt – is that okay?’
Checklist
• 	‘Please can you point to where you feel the pain?’
• 	‘Let’s look at your elbow… and the other elbow.’ (Swelling, redness, deformity.)
• 	‘Please tell me if you feel any pain when I examine your elbow now.’ (Heat or tenderness over the
epicondyles.)
• 	‘Now can you move your hands to touch your shoulder and straighten both your arms?’
• 	‘Can you place your palms up to the ceiling… and now down to the foor?’ (Pronation/supination.)
• 	‘Now hold my hand as if you are going to shake it. Turn your hand as if twisting a handle and I will try
to resist you.’ (Use both of your hands to prevent injury to yourself!)
• 	‘And turn the other way.’
• 	‘Now with your arm outstretched, bend your wrist back towards you; if I resist you does that cause pain
in your elbow?’ (Lateral epicondylitis.)
• 	‘Now can you bend your wrist toward the foor? Does it hurt your elbow if I resist this movement?’
(Medial epicondylitis.)
• 	‘Can you feel me touch you at the elbow?’
• 	‘Can you reach both hands onto your head? Now can you reach your back?’ (Function.)
• 	‘I want to have a look at the shoulder… and now feel your shoulder; is this painful? Keeping your arms
straight, can you move the arms out to the sides and lif the arms into the air?’
• 	‘Now looking at your wrists, is there any tenderness? Can you move your wrists?’

-- 550 of 575 --

Examinations
Examinations 	Hands/Wrists
• 	Look → feel → move → power → sensation → function.
• 	Always examine joint above and joint below.
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your hands, wrists and elbows. If you could please roll your sleeves above the
elbow. Is that okay?’
Checklist
• 	‘Let’s put a pillow on your lap for your hands to rest on.’
• 	‘Please point to where you feel the pain.’
• 	‘Now let’s look and see if there is any swelling or changes.’
• 	‘May I feel your skin for heat?... And now, as I feel each joint in turn, let me know if you have any pain.’
(Feel each fnger joint, metacarpal, wrist and elbow joint in turn.)
• 	‘Are you able to copy the following movements?’ (Make a fst, open and close hands, wrist full ROM and
elbow full ROM.)
• 	‘Can you squeeze my fngers?’
• 	‘Now stretch your fngers out and keep them out.’ (Ulnar.)
• 	‘Lif your thumb to the ceiling and press against me.’ (Median.)
• 	Test sensation in ulnar and median distribution.
• 	‘Can you touch each fnger against your thumb?’ (Function.)
• 	‘Please copy me and place your hands like this. Hold the hands there and let me know if you feel any
tingling.’ (Phalen’s test for carpal tunnel syndrome.)
• 	‘Now I will tap over your wrist. Tell me if you feel any tingling in the hand.’ (Tinel’s test for carpal tunnel
syndrome.)
➠ 536

-- 551 of 575 --

Examinations
➠ 537	
Examinations 	Hips/Lumbar Spine
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your back and hips, if I may, to fnd the cause of this pain.’
Checklist
• 	‘Please point to where you feel the pain.’
• 	‘Please walk across the room.’
• 	‘Now with four fngers holding onto my hands, if you can please lif your right knee so you are standing
on your lef foot only. And now the other leg please.’ (Trendelenburg’s test.)
• 	‘Now please turn away from me and I’ll look at your spine.’ (Posture, lordosis, kyphosis.)
• 	‘As I feel your spine, please tell me if this is painful.’ (Spine then paraspinal muscles.)
• 	‘Back to face me now… (step away) can you keep your legs straight and touch your toes?’
• 	‘And try leaning down each side and back.’ (Flexion, extension, lateral fexion, rotation.)
• 	‘Now lif each leg out to each side.’ (Hip abduction.)
• 	‘And leg behind you.’ (Hip extension.)
• 	‘Onto the couch now; are you tender where I press on your hips?’ (Greater trochanters.)
• 	‘Keep your leg straight and raise the leg one at a time.’ (Hip fex and SLR – sciatica.)
• 	‘Can you bend your knee to your chest now?’
• 	‘Can I see if I can take that further? Now I’m going to check your hips.’ (Int/ext rotations.)
• 	Consider lower limb neurology testing.
Trendelenburg test: ‘Te sound side sags’ when weight bearing on weak gluteals, i.e. if unable to hold pelvis
level standing on one leg, the standing leg is the afected side.
Causes include: dislocated hip, # greater trochanter, subluxation of the upper femoral epiphysis (SUFE),
muscle-wasting diseases – although can be positive in any painful hip condition.

-- 552 of 575 --

Examinations
Examinations 	Knee
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your knees as well as your hips and ankles as sometimes there is a problem
with the adjacent joint. If I may ask you to remove your trousers/skirt (keep shorts on). Is that okay? If at any
point you are in pain, please let me know.’
Checklist
• 	‘Facing me now, please, point to where you feel the pain.’
• 	Look for valgus/varus positioning of knees/ankles, deformity, wasting and swelling in the lower limb.
• 	‘Please turn to the side, now turn away from me, turn again and now back to face me.’
• 	‘Please walk across the room.’
• 	‘Now with four fngers, hold my hands and lif one knee up at a time.’ (Trendelenburg test.)
• 	‘Lif each leg out to each side’ (Hip abduction.) ‘And leg behind you.’ (Hip extension.)
• 	‘Please come over to the couch and lie facing upwards… with your knees slightly bent.’
• 	‘I’m just going to check for heat and tenderness now in the hip (greater trochanter), knee (joint lines
and ankle (malleolus).’
• 	‘Now straighten your leg and I will test for fuid.’ (Patellar tap and fuid test for efusion.)
• 	‘Lef side now, can you make this leg as straight as possible?’ (Hyperextend knee.)
• 	‘Now lif your leg straight into the air.’ (Hip fex). ‘Bring your knee to your chest.’ (Knee fex.)
• 	‘Now can I do the same and see if I can take that further?’ (Feeling for crepitus.)
• 	‘I’m just going to test your hip movement.’ (Internal and external rotation.)
• 	‘And now can you point your toes up and down, lef and right?’ (Ankle ROM.)
• 	‘Please bend your knee and I will pull and push, to test the ligaments in your knee.’ (Anterior and pos-
terior draw test for cruciates.)
• 	‘And now you will feel some pressure on the sides of the knees.’ (Collateral ligaments.)
• 	‘And now as you straighten your knee, I will move your ankle.’ (McMurray’s for meniscus tear.)
➠ 538

-- 553 of 575 --

Examinations
➠ 539	
Examinations 	Foot/Ankle
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your foot and ankle as well as your knees as sometimes there is a problem with
the adjacent joint. If I may ask you to remove your trousers/skirt (keep shorts on). Is that okay? If at any point
you are in pain, please let me know.’
Checklist
• 	‘Facing me now, please, point to where you feel the pain.’
• 	Look for valgus/varus positioning of knees/ankles, deformity, wasting and swelling in the lower limb.
• 	‘Please turn to the side, now turn away from me, turn again and now back to face me.’
• 	‘Please walk across the room… now walk on your tiptoes… and on your heels.’
• 	‘Please come over to the couch and lie facing upwards… with your knees slightly bent.’
• 	‘I’m just going to check for heat and tenderness now in the knee (joint lines), ankle (malleolus) and foot
(metatarsals).’
• 	‘Lef side now, can you make this leg as straight as possible for me?’ (Hyperextend knee.)
• 	‘Now lif your leg straight into the air.’ (Hip fex.)
• 	‘Bend your knee to your chest.’ (Knee fex.)
• 	‘Now can I do the same and see if I can take that further?’ (Feeling for crepitus.)
• 	‘And now can you point your toes up and down, lef and right?’ (Ankle ROM.)
• 	‘Right side now please.’ (Repeat.)
• 	‘Can you now turn over so you are facing the bed? I’m just going to squeeze your calf muscles.’
(Achilles test.)
• 	‘And feel for pain under the foot.’ (Plantar fasciitis.)
• 	‘Can you feel me touch your skin on the feet and toes?’

-- 554 of 575 --

Examinations
Examinations 	ENT
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your ears, nose and throat… is that okay?’
Checklist
• 	‘First let’s look at your ears.’ Is there redness/swelling?
• 	‘Is it tender when I press on this bone?’ (Mastoiditis.)
• 	‘Or pull slightly at your ear?’ (Otitis externa.)
• 	‘What about when I press here?’ (Tragus.) ‘Now let’s look inside the ears.’
• 	Ensure you hold the otoscope like a pen in the same hand as the ear which you are examining.
• 	‘Let’s test your hearing.’ (At 1 m whisper, then if required 1 m voice, then next to ear voice.)
• 	Weber’s test: ‘I’m going to place this tuning fork (512 Hz) on your forehead. Can you tell me where you
hear the sound – in the middle or to one side?’
• 	Conductive deafness: localises to the afected side.
• 	Sensorineural deafness: localises to the unafected side.
• 	Rinne’s test: ‘Now I’m going to place the tuning fork behind your ear and then in front. Which is louder?’
• 	Normal = air conduction (AC) > bone conduction (BC).
• 	Conductive deafness = BC > AC.
• 	Sensorineural deafness: AC > BC.
• 	‘Now can you tilt your head back? I’m going to look into the nose.’
• 	‘Now let’s look at your throat.’
• 	‘And fnally, I want to see if you have any tenderness or lumps in your neck.’
➠ 540

-- 555 of 575 --

Examinations
➠ 541	
Examinations 	Peripheral Vascular
Example description
‘I’d like to thoroughly examine your vessels in your tummy and legs. If I may ask you to remove your trousers
so that I can feel your pulses. I’d also like to take your blood pressure if I may. Please lie on the couch facing up.’
Checklist
• 	Inspect legs for hair loss, colour change and look around the feet for tissue damage/ulceration.
• 	‘I’m now going to feel your vessels.’
• 	‘May I start with your large vessel in your tummy?’ (AAA.)
• 	‘And now the pulses starting in the groin please.’
• 	Femoral, popliteal, posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis.
• 	‘Now I’d like you to lif this leg up; we are going to hold it (in reality for 45 seconds but not in the exam!)
and watch for any colour change (pallor)… And now can you drop the leg over the edge of the bed.’
(Reactive hyperaemia of Buerger’s test.)
• 	Consider examining the heart, BP, lower limb sensation, ofering a urine glucose test and ankle brachial
pressure index (ABPI) checks.
If varicose veins are present, check with patient standing.
• 	Feel for tenderness in thrombophlebitis.
• 	Look for signs of DVT, oedema, tenderness along the greater saphenous vein (inner thigh).
• 	Measure calves from 10 cm below the tibial tuberosity.

-- 556 of 575 --



-- 557 of 575 --

➠ 543
APPENDIX 1
Mandatory Cases for the RCA
At the time of writing, as well as submitting no more than two cases from any single curriculum area for
the RCA, you must also evidence at least one from each of the following groups:
Children and young people – a case involving a child aged 16 years or younger. Tis can be by proxy – for
example, a parent speaking about the child. Te consultation should refect the fact that the patient is a child,
rather than the age being immaterial to the consultation.
Older adult – a case where the patient is 65 years or older.
Acute problem – a case where there is an acute problem that needs urgent investigation or referral. Tis
means that there is a new presentation, or change in an existing condition, that needs immediate assessment
or urgent (immediate or 2WW) investigation or referral.
Maternal and reproductive health – Tis is a broad area covering not just all maternity care, physical and
mental, but also gynaecological problems, sexual health, contraception and infections – including all gen-
ders. Breast lump cases (other than lumps found in the postnatal period) are not eligible for this mandatory
group.
Mental health condition – all areas covered by an ICD or DSM classifcation.
A long-term condition, e.g. cancer, multimorbidity or disability – this means a condition that cannot
currently be cured but can be managed using, for example, medication or other therapies. Note that this
MUST be an established diagnosis, not a new one. A patient with established heart failure coming for a
review would count, but a consultation where you make a new diagnosis of heart failure would not.
Many cases throughout the book evidence these mandatory areas, and we have grouped these together
below. Some cases cover more than one area, for example, Joshua Middleton, aged 11, with angioedema
would cover both ‘children and young people’ and also ‘acute problem.’ Chloe Livingstone-Smith, with
postnatal psychosis, covers three areas – ‘acute problem’, ‘maternal health’ and ‘mental health condition’. We
have marked these cases with an asterisk in the table.
A note of caution, however – if a case were to be disallowed by the RCGP, perhaps for technical reasons,
then you could be doubly penalised if that particular case showcased more than one area. For example, if
you were using Chloe Livingstone-Smith as your ONLY evidence in the above three areas, and if there was
a technical breach, then as well as scoring no marks for that case you may also be penalised for not having
submitted a case that fulflled three mandatory areas. If there are two or more omitted criteria, then your
whole RCA submission may be declined, meaning you need to reapply, with all-new cases and no refund
of your exam fee. It may therefore be better to select the ‘best’ mandatory criterion for a particular case and
evidence the other areas in diferent cases.

-- 558 of 575 --

➠ 544
Mandatory area 	Name, age and gender of
patient
Chapter
and case
number
Problem
Children and young people 	Joshua Middleton 11 M* 	2.1 	Angioedema
(13 cases) 	Peter Atkins 12 M 	2.3 	Asthma diagnosis
Arthur Miller 12 M* 	4.4 	Eczema
Sarah Smith 5 F 	5.2 	Acute otitis media
Amena Khalil 4 F 	6.2 	Squint
Connor McGowen 9 M 	10.4 	Anaemia
Holly Forsyth 5 F 	10.5 	Henoch–Schönlein purpura
Kalpesh Khan 6 M 	11.1 	Recurrent UTI
Jayden Hall 13 months M 	11.3 	Viral illness
Eleanor Cartwright 15 F* 	13.5 	Eating disorder
Bhakti Shukla 12 months F 	18.1 	Immunisation refusal
Gemma Briggs 15 F* 	20.2 	Contraception – combined
Florence Wriggley 13 F 	20.5 	Gender dysphoria
Older adult >65 	Brendon Philips 74 M* 	3.2 	Heart failure
(19 cases) 	Elizabeth Alderton 65 F* 	3.3 	Atrial fbrillation
Hibiki Hayashi 75 M 	3.5 	Angina
Paul Robson 65 M* 	4.1 	Skin lesion
Maureen Staples 70 F* 	4.5 	Psoriasis
Abida Khan 70 F* 	6.3 	Acute glaucoma
Fred Scott 81 M 	6.4 	AMD and cataract
Emmanuel Adebayo 71 M* 	7.4 	Change in bowel habit
Raymond Styles 86 M 	10.1 	Suspected DVT
William Jefferies 65 M 	10.2 	Myeloma
Alexander Dickens 78 M 	12.1 	Acute kidney injury
Bob Riley 67 M* 	12.2 	Chronic kidney disease
Angus McLaughlin 72 M 	12.5 	Overactive bladder
Shirley Warner 72 F 	15.3 	Osteoporosis
Maggie Freestone 72 F 	17.1 	Peripheral neuropathy
Lionel Moore 84 M* 	17.2 	Normal pressure
hydrocephalus
Lionel Morgan 82 M 	19.1 	Pneumonia
Chao Lin 82 M* 	19.3 	COPD
Katherine Knight 68 F* 	21.5 	Harmful drinking
A. Acute problem 	Joshua Middleton 11 M* 	2.1 	Angioedema
(15 cases) 	Mary Jones 45 F 	3.1 	Chest pain of recent onset
Elizabeth Alderton 65 F* 	3.3 	Atrial fbrillation
Paul Robson 65 M* 	4.1 	Skin lesion
Mandatory Cases for the RCA

-- 559 of 575 --

➠ 545
Mandatory area 	Name, age and gender of
patient
Chapter
and case
number
Problem
Mike Williams 55 M 	5.1 	Facial nerve palsy
Abida Khan 70 F* 	6.3 	Acute glaucoma
Eric Johnson 61 M 	6.5 	Retinal detachment
Rosie Carpenter 40 F 	7.1 	Abdominal pain
Emmanuel Adebayo 71 M* 	7.4 	Change in bowel habit
Hilda Rowland 53 F 	9.3 	Post-menopausal bleeding
Chloe Livingstone-Smith 28 F* 	13.4 	Postnatal psychosis
Mary Owen 35 F 	14.1 	Hyperglycaemia
Lionel Moore 84 M* 	17.2 	Normal pressure
hydrocephalus
Ahmed Hidad 58 M 	17.4 	TIA
Daisy Fitton 24 F 	19.2 	Acute asthma
B. Reproductive and
maternal health
Jennifer Adeyemi 27 F 	2.4 	Varicella in pregnancy
(13 cases) 	Francesca Reece 32 F 	4.3 	Melasma
Heather Mumford 33 F 	8.1 	Down syndrome
Olivia Wales 29 F 	8.2 	Cystic fbrosis
Jacqui Mason 24 F 	9.1 	Heavy menstrual bleeding
Juliet Perkins 27 F 	9.2 	Polycystic ovary syndrome
Chloe Livingstone-Smith 28 F* 	13.4 	Postnatal psychosis
Jayne Smith 37 F 	14.5 	Diabetes in pregnancy
Chloe Atherton 25 F 	18.2 	Cervical screening
Kevin Barton 57 M 	20.1 	Erectile dysfunction
Gemma Briggs 15 F* 	20.2 	Contraception – combined
Stephanie Smith 24 F 	20.3 	Pelvic infammatory disease
Fedora Baros 38 F 	20.4 	LARC and sterilisation
C. Mental health problem
(10 cases)
Stephen Harper 42 M 	13.1 	Anxiety
Jessica Miller 24 F* 	13.2 	Depression
Andrea Lockwood 36 F 	13.3 	Personality disorder
Chloe Livingstone-Smith 28 F* 	13.4 	Postnatal psychosis
Eleanor Cartwright 15 F* 	13.5 	Eating disorder
Justin Walton 17 M 	16.3 	Autism and transition process
Janine Paton 33 F 	16.4 	Mental health and intellectual
disability
Ella Jones 42 F 	21.1 	Substance use
Michaela Butt 32 F 	21.4 	Opiate abuse
Katherine Knight 68 F* 	21.5 	Harmful drinking
Mandatory Cases for the RCA

-- 560 of 575 --

➠ 546
Mandatory area 	Name, age and gender of
patient
Chapter
and case
number
Problem
D. People with LTC 	Brendon Philips 74 M* 	3.2 	Heart failure
(10 cases) 	Arthur Miller 12 M* 	4.4 	Eczema
Maureen Staples 70 F* 	4.5 	Psoriasis
Anthony Carlisle 26 M 	7.5 	Infammatory bowel disease
Louise Barker 33 F 	9.4 	Cervical cancer
Bob Riley 67 M* 	12.2 	Chronic kidney disease
Jessica Miller 24 F* 	13.2 	Depression
Fatima Sayed 47 F 	14.4 	Hyperthyroidism
Yasmin Small 23 F 	17.3 	Migraine
Chao Lin 82 M* 	19.3 	COPD
Mandatory Cases for the RCA

-- 561 of 575 --

➠ 547
APPENDIX 2
Useful Resources
Updated at the Link Hub at CompleteMRCGP.co.uk
Information for GPs 	Patient.co.uk and GP Notebook
PILs in different languages 	https://www.cntw.nhs.uk/resource-library/
DermNet 	http://www.dermnetnz.org/
Primary care dermatology 	http://www.pcds.org.uk/
Translated dermatology PILs 	https://www.skinhealthinfo.org.uk/a-z-conditions-treatments/
Medicines in pregnancy 	http://www.medicinesinpregnancy.org/
Medications in breastfeeding 	https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501922/
DVLA at a glance 	https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/assessing-fitness-
to-drive-a-guide-for-medical-professionals
Fitness to fly 	https://www.caa.co.uk/passengers/before-you-fly/am-i-fit-to-fly/
guidance-for-health-professionals/assessing-ftness-to-fy/
Travel clinic 	http://www.ftfortravel.nhs.uk/home.aspx
Drug monitoring requirements 	http://www.bucksformulary.nhs.uk/docs/sc/
Parent advice 	http://www.whenshouldiworry.com/
Te Incredible Years by Carolyn Webster-Stratton.
Oxford antimicrobial guidelines
Adults and children 	https://clinox.info/local-guidelines-and-pathways/
antimicrobial-guidelines-adults/58134
Useful guidance 	Contraception 	www.fsrh.org
Green-Top Guidelines 	https://www.rcog.org.uk/guidelines
SIGN 	http://sign.ac.uk/
NICE 	https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance
BTS 	https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/
quality-improvement/guidelines/
Mental health 	http://www.oxfordmindfulness.org/about-mindfulness/
http://www.fearfghter.com/
https://moodgym.com.au
http://www.mind.org.uk/
Antidepressant switches 	https://www.mims.co.uk/table-antidepressants-guide-switching-
withdrawing/mental-health/article/1415768

-- 562 of 575 --

Prescribing in psychiatry
CBT book for the keen reader
CBT – if struggling to concentrate
Joint exercises
Back screening tool
Osteoporosis assessment
Physiotherapy websites
Vitamin D guidelines – adults
Vitamin D guidelines – children
Alcohol – useful information
Intellectual disability PILs
Cardiovascular risk
Institute of Blind People
Deaf Association
BMJs Easily Missed Series
E learning
Courses not to miss!
RCGP curriculum
Conference not to miss!
Consultation skills
Time out from revision…
Taylor D.M., Paton C., Kapur S. (2015) Te Maudsley Prescribing
Guidelines in Psychiatry, 12th edition. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Williams M., Penman D. (2011) Mindfulness: A Practical Guide to
Finding Peace in a Frantic World. London: Piatkus Books.
Black A. (2012) Living in the Moment: With Mindfulness Meditations.
London: Ryland, Peters & Small.
https://www.versusarthritis.org/
https://www.keele.ac.uk/search/?q=back+screening+tool
https://www.shefeld.ac.uk/FRAX/
http://www.shefeldachesandpains.com/
http://www.ouh.nhs.uk/osteoporosis/useful-info/documents/
VitaminDSupplementationinprimarycarev16.pdf
https://www.nuh.nhs.uk/vitamin-d-defciency-in-children/
https://www.who.int/health-topics/alcohol#tab=tab_1
https://www.nhsinform.scot/translations/formats/easy-read
http://www.fairadvice.org.uk/free-downloads.php
http://qrisk.org/
https://rnib.org.uk/
http://www.bda.org.uk/
http://www.bmj.com/specialties/easily-missed
We recommend this exercise – for each ‘easily missed’ condition:
1. Consider what symptoms the patient may have presented with.
2. Ten for each symptom think about what are the most likely diag-
noses (common things are common!) and what is ‘easily missed’?
http://elearning.rcgp.org.uk/
http://www.pulse-learning.co.uk/
http://www.gponline.com/education
http://www.gp-update.co.uk/Te-GP-Update-Course
https://www.nbmedical.com/courses/subject/hot-topics-gp-update
http://www.rcgp.org.uk/learning/one-day-essentials.aspx
https://www.rcgp.org.uk/training-exams/training/gp-curriculum-
overview.aspx
https://www.rcgp.org.uk/learning/rcgp-annual-conference.aspx
Moulton L. (2016) The Naked Consultation: A Practical Guide to
Primary Care Consultation Skills, 2nd edition. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Watch a TED Talk for inspiration!
➠ 548
Useful Resources

-- 563 of 575 --

➠ 549	
Index
Numbers
2WW referral
colorectal cancer, 184
endoscopy, 176
ENT, 141
gynaecological cancers, 230, 242
lung cancer, 478
prostate cancer, 302
urological problems, 311
5-alpha reductase inhibitors, 313
6 S for success consultation model, 10
A
A&E, inappropriate use of, 440–2
abdominal aortic aneurysm, 172
abdominal aortic aneurysm screening, 454
abdominal examination, 530
abdominal pain, 170–2
and change in bowel habit, 182–4
diferential diagnosis, 172
dyspepsia, 174–6
irritable bowel syndrome, 178–80
ulcerative colitis, 186–8
abuse, past history of, 326–8
acamprosate, 526
ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme)
inhibitors
in angina, 92
in heart failure, 80
in hypertension, 88
acne, 104–6
actinic (solar) keratosis, 102
action plans, 442
acute coronary syndrome (ACS), 76
acute glaucoma, 154–6, 166
acute kidney injury (AKI), 292–3
acute pancreatitis, 172
acute problems
abdominal pain, 170–2
acute asthma, 464–6
acute glaucoma, 154–6
angioedema, 50–2
atrial fbrillation, 82–4
change in bowel habit, 182–4
chest pain of recent onset, 74–6
facial nerve palsy, 122–4
hyperglycaemia, 340–2
normal pressure hydrocephalus, 414–16
post-menopausal bleeding, 228–30
postnatal psychosis, 330–2
retinal detachment, 162–4
skin lesion, 100–2
TIA, 422–4
acute prostatitis, 306
adapalene, 106
Addison’s disease, 346
adrenaline, 52
age-related macular degeneration (AMD), 158–60
albumin creatinine ratio (ACR), 298
albuminuria, 298
alcohol consumption, 455
harmful drinking, 524–6
and safeguarding, 512–14
alcohol dependence, 514
and driving, 526
alcoholic liver disease, 189
alcohol withdrawal, 526
alendronate, 372, 374
allergies, 69
angioedema, 50–2
contact dermatitis, 66–8
insect stings, 54–6
allopurinol, 378
alogliptin, 359
alpha-blockers
in BPH, 313
in hypertension, 96
altitude sickness (acute mountain sickness), 286–8
amblyopia, 152
amenorrhoea, PCOS, 224–6
amlodipine
in heart failure, 80
in hypertension, 86
amniocentesis, 196
AMTS (abbreviated mental test score), 462
anaemia, 258–60
haemoglobin cut ofs, 260
anaphylaxis, 52
angina, 90–2
angioedema, 50–2
ankle examination, 539
annual health checks, 392
anorexia nervosa see eating disorders
antenatal screening, 196, 454
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury, 370
anterior uveitis, acute, 166
antibiotics

-- 564 of 575 --

in acute COPD, 466
in acute otitis media, 128
in blepharitis, 148
in Lyme disease, 276
in pelvic infammatory disease, 492
in pneumonia, 462
in prostatitis, 306
in sinusitis, 136
afer splenectomy, 254, 256
anticoagulation
in atrial fbrillation, 82, 93–4
risk factors for bleeding, 93
in VTE, 248, 265
antidepressants, 324
antihyperglycaemics, 359–60
metformin, 226, 342, 358
antimuscarinics, 310
antisocial personality disorder, 328
anxiety, 76, 318–20
aortic aneurysm, 172
apixaban, 82, 265–6
appendicitis, 172
apraxia, 414–16
ARBs (angiotensin receptor blockers)
in heart failure, 80
in hypertension, 96
AREDS2, 160
aspirin
in angina, 92
in TIA, 424
asthma
acute, 464–6
diagnosis, 58–60, 479
asylum seekers, 152, 440–2
atopic eczema, 112–14
atrial fbrillation (AF), 82–4
cardiology referral, 94
stroke risk management, 93–4
atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD), 195, 196
autistic spectrum disorder, 394–5
and MMR, 434
autoimmune hepatitis, 189
autosomal-dominant disorders, 213–14
autosomal-recessive disorders, 214
autosplenectomy, 256
avoidant personality disorder, 328
azelaic acid, 106
B
B12 defciency, 260
‘baby blues,’ 332
back pain, 302, 364–6
bad news, 196
bariatric surgery, 450
Becker muscular dystrophy, 214
Bell’s palsy, 122–4
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV),
138–40
benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH), 313
benzodiazepines, 320
weaning, 510
beta-blockers
in AF, 86
in angina, 92
in heart failure, 80
in hypertension, 96
bicalutamide, 313
biliary colic, 172
bisphosphonates, 372, 374
bladder outfow obstruction, 302
bladder overactivity, 308–10
blepharitis, 146–8
blood pressure targets
in CKD, 298
in TIA/stroke, 424
blurred vision, 162–4
body dysmorphia, 502
borderline personality disorder, 328
bowel cancer screening, 454
bowel habit, change in, 182–4
bowel obstruction, 172
BRCA1, BRCA2, 208
breast cancer
family history of, 206–8
risk from HRT, 240
screening programme, 454
breasts, gynaecomastia, 232–4
breathlessness
COPD, 466, 468–70
heart failure, 78–80
pneumonia, 460–2
see also asthma
Buerger’s test, 541
bulimia nervosa see eating disorders
bunions, 378
C
CA125 testing, 230
calcium channel blockers
in AF, 86
in angina, 92
in heart failure, 80
in hypertension, 88
calcium supplementation, 374
➠ 550

-- 565 of 575 --

Calgary Cambridge consultation model, 9
canaglifozin, 360
cancer
breast, 206–8
cervical, 232–4
colorectal, 182–4, 202–4
endometrial, 230
laryngeal, 141
lung, 476–8
oral, 141
ovarian, 230
prostate, 302
capabilities, 4–5
capacity assessment, 248, 265
BMA Mental Capacity Toolkit, 405
CAPRIE trial, 424
carbimazole, 352–4
cardiac syndrome X, 92
cardiomyopathy, 210–12
cardioprotective diet, 455
cardiovascular disease risk
assessment, 446
from HRT, 240
cardiovascular examination, 528
care plans, 442
carpal tunnel syndrome, 536
cataracts, 158–60
cauda equina syndrome, 366
cerebellar signs, 531
cervical cancer, 230
end-of-life care discussion, 232–4
cervical screening, 436–8, 453
management of results, 438
cervical spine examination, 534
CHA2DS2VASc score, 93
change in bowel habit, 182–4
chaperones, 527
Charcot’s triad, 172
chest infection
COPD exacerbations, 466
pneumonia, 460–2
chest pain, 74–6
angina, 90–2
diferential diagnosis, 76
chest X-ray, urgent referral, 478
chickenpox (varicella), in pregnancy, 62–4
children and young people
acute otitis media, 126–8
anaemia, 258–60
angioedema, 50–2
asthma diagnosis, 58–60
consultations, 25
contraception, 488–90
eating disorder, 334–6
eczema, 112–14
gender dysphoria, 500–2
Henoch–Schönlein purpura, 262–4
immunisation refusal, 432–4
obesity, 450
recurrent UTI, 270–2
squint, 150–2
viral illness, 278–80
cholangitis, 172
cholecystitis, 172
cholesterol levels, 444–6
chorionic villous sampling, 196
chromosomal disorders, 215
Down syndrome, 194–6, 390–2
chronic health problems see long-term conditions
chronic hepatitis, 189
chronic kidney disease (CKD), 296–8
chronic prostatitis, 306
clinical management, 19, 20
clopidogrel, 424
coercive controlling behaviour (CCB), 518
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), 320, 510
coin lesions, CXR, 478
colchicine, 378
colorectal cancer, 184
change in bowel habit, 182–3
genetic conditions, 202–4, 213
screening programme, 454
colposcopy, 436–8
compliance with medication, 342
conductive hearing loss, 132
confdentiality, 234
eating disorders, 336
underage contraception, 490
congenital heart disease, 195, 196
conjunctivitis, 166
constipation, change in bowel habit, 182–4
consultation models, 6
6 S for success, 10
Calgary Cambridge, 9
FOCUS, 11–14
Helman, 7
Neighbour, 8
Pendleton, 7
consultation skills
interpersonal skills, 25–6
jargon avoidance, 32
phrasing questions, 30–1
structure and time management, 22–4
test results, 28
vulnerable patients, 29
contact dermatitis, 66–8
➠ 551

-- 566 of 575 --

contact lenses, 148
contraception
combined, 488–90
discontinuation, 504
emergency, 503
general guidelines, 490
girl < 16 years, 488–90
and intellectual disability, 402–4
long-acting reversible, 496–8
contraceptive implants, 498
COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease),
468–70
acute exacerbations, 466
spirometry, 479
copper IUDs, 496, 498
emergency contraception, 503
corneal ulcers, 166
cough
asthma, 58–60
COPD, 466,
lung cancer, 476–8
counselling
pre-conception, women with diabetes, 358
PSA test, 302, 314
COVID-19, 29
cranial nerve examination, 531
CRB-65 score, 462
C-reactive protein (CRP), 462
creatinine, 294
crisis teams, 342
Crohn’s disease, 188
Cushing’s syndrome, 350
cyproterone acetate, 313
cystic fbrosis, 198–200, 214
D
DANISH acronym, 531
dapaglifozin, 360
darifenacin, 310
data gathering, 19–20
deafness
examination, 540
sensorineural, 130–2
unilateral, 141
death, end-of-life care discussions, 232–4
deep venous thrombosis (DVT), 246–8
dementia, normal pressure hydrocephalus, 414–16
dependent personality disorder, 328
depression, 90–2, 322–4
and personality disorder, 326–8
postnatal, 332
stepped care model, 324
diabetes
antihyperglycaemics, 359–60
hyperglycaemia, 340–2
pregnancy, 356–8
risk from HRT, 240
visual problems, impact of, 164
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 340–1
diabetic retinopathy screening, 454
diagnostic overshadowing, 388
diarrhoea
change in bowel habit, 182–4
diferential diagnosis, 180
ulcerative colitis, 186–8
diet
cardioprotective, 455
low-calorie, 450
difcult consultations, 6, 30–1, 104–6
digoxin
in AF, 86
in heart failure, 80
diltiazem, 92
diphtheria, 452
diphtheria immunisation, 451
direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs)
in AF, 93–4
apixaban, 265–6
in DVT, 248, 265–6
dissection, 76
dissocial personality disorder, 328
diuretics, 80
in hypertension, 88, 96
misuse, 336
dizziness, BPPV, 138–40
domestic violence, 516–18
Down syndrome, 194–6, 215
annual health checks, 390–2
antenatal screening, 196, 454
potential issues, 392
DPP-4 inhibitors, 359
driving
and alcohol dependence, 526
and obstructive sleep apnoea, 474
visual standards, 160
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 214
dulaglutide, 360
dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB), 222
dyspepsia, 174–6
dysphagia, 176
dyspnoea
COPD, 466, 468–70
heart failure, 78–80
pneumonia, 460–2
see also asthma
➠ 552

-- 567 of 575 --

E
ears, examination, 540
eating disorders, 334–6
ectopic pregnancy, 172
eczema, 112–14
Edward’s syndrome (trisomy 18), 215
elbow examination, 535
elderly patients, 29
emergency contraception, 503
emollients, 66, 112–14
emotional abuse, 518
emotionally unstable personality disorder, 328
empaglifozin, 360
empathy, 22, 25
end-of-life care discussions, 232–4
endometrial cancer, 230
endometriosis, 241
endometriotic cysts, 242
endophthalmitis, 166
endoscopy referral, 176
ENT examination, 540
Epiduo, 104, 106
epiglottitis, 141
episcleritis, 166
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), 282–4
Epworth Sleepiness Questionnaire, 474
erectile dysfunction, 302, 312, 484–6
prostatitis, 306
erythema migrans, 274–6
estimated GFR (eGFR), 298
Evra patch, 490
examinations, 27
abdominal, 530
cardiovascular, 528
cranial nerves, 531
elbow, 535
ENT, 540
foot/ankle, 539
hands/wrists, 536
hip/lumbar spine, 537
informed consent, 527
knee, 538
neurological, 532
peripheral vascular, 541
respiratory, 529
shoulder/cervical spine, 534
thyroid/neck, 533
exenatide, 360
exercise recommendations, 450, 455
expedition medicines, 288
eyes
acute glaucoma, 154–6
age-related macular degeneration, 158–60
blepharitis, 146–8
cataracts, 158–60
examination, 531
red eye, 165–6
retinal detachment, 162–4
squint, 150–2
ezetimibe, 456
F
facial nerve palsy, 122–4
Factor V Leiden, 213
faecal calprotectin, 167, 180
faecal immunochemical testing (FIT), 184
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), 202–4, 213
familial hypercholesterolaemia, 446
FAST (TIA/stroke screen), 424
fatigue, 348–50
feedback cards, 20–1
FeNO, 60
fenofbrate, 456
fever in under 5s, 278–9
trafc light table, 280
fbroids, 222
fbrotic lung disease, 479
fnasteride, 302, 313
foaters, 162–4
fu immunisation, 451
FOCUS Consultation Model, 11–14
practising skills, 17–18
FODMAPs, 178, 180
folate defciency, 260
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) testing, 239
foot examination, 539
foot pain, 376–8
foreign bodies, eye, 166
fractures, osteoporosis, 372–4
fragile X syndrome (FRAX), 214
Fraser guidelines, 490
frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis), 382
G
gallbladder polyps, 176
gallstones, 170, 172, 176
‘gaslighting,’ 518
gastro-oesophageal refux disease (GORD), 76
gender dysphoria, 500–2
general anxiety disorder (GAD), 318–20
genetic conditions
autosomal-dominant disorders, 213–14
autosomal-recessive disorders, 214
chromosomal disorders, 215
➠ 553

-- 568 of 575 --

cystic fbrosis, 198–200
Down syndrome, 194–6, 215, 390–2, 454
familial adenomatous polyposis, 202–4
HOCM, 210–12
X-linked dominant disorders, 214
X-linked recessive disorders, 214
genetic testing, 198
family history of breast cancer, 206–8
gestational diabetes, 358
glandular fever, 282–4
glaucoma, acute, 154–6, 166
glibenclamide, 359
glicazide, 359
glimepiride, 359
glipizide, 359
glitazones, 360
GLP-1 agonists, 360
GOLD (Global Obstructive Lung Disease)
Guidelines, 470
goserelin, 313
gout, 378
Graves’ disease, 352–4
GTN (glyceryl trinitrate), 92
gynaecological cancers, 230
ovarian cyst management, 242
see also cervical cancer
gynaecomastia, 232–4
H
haemarthrosis, 370
haematemesis, 176
haematuria, 311
haemochromatosis, 189, 214
haemoglobin concentration, 260
haemolytic anaemia, 260
haemophilias, 214
Haemophilus infuenzae, 452
HiB immunisation, 451
hallux valgus, 378
hands, examination, 536
harmful drinking, 514, 524–6
see also alcohol consumption
HbA1c, targets in pregnancy, 358
headache
diferential diagnosis, 420
migraine, 418–20
red fags, 420
Health Action Plans, 392
hearing
examination, 132, 531, 540
see also deafness
heart failure, 76, 78–80
heavy menstrual bleeding, 220–2
Helicobacter pylori testing, 176
Helman consultation model, 7
Henoch–Schönlein purpura, 262–4
hepatitis, 189
hepatitis B immunisation, 451
hereditary haemochromatosis, 214
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC),
204, 213
high altitude cerebral oedema (HACE), 288
high altitude pulmonary oedema (HAPE), 288
hip examination, 537
hirsutism, 226
histrionic personality disorder, 328
holistic care, 462
Transition Process Model, 396
hormone replacement therapy (HRT), 240
in premature menopause, 239
hospital admission refusal, 246–8, 265
human papillomavirus (HPV), 438
immunisation, 451
hydralazine, 80
hydrocephalus, normal pressure, 414–16
hyperandrogenism, PCOS, 224–6
hypercalcaemia, 252, 344–6
diferential diagnosis, 346
hypercholesterolaemia, 444–6
lipid-lowering therapy, 456
hyperglycaemia, 340–2
hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar non-ketotic coma
(HONK), 342
hyperparathyroidism, 344–6
hypertension, 86–8
resistant, 96
secondary causes, 88
white coat, 96
hyperthyroidism, 352–4
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
(HOCM), 210–12
hyperviscosity symptoms, 252
hypopyon, 166
I
ibuprofen
and asthma, 58
and melasma, 108
ICE (ideas, concerns, expectations), 15–16, 30
immune disorders, 69
immunisation
afer splenectomy, 256
legal considerations, 434
immunisation refusal, 432–4
➠ 554

-- 569 of 575 --

immunisation schedule, 451
inappropriate use of services, 440–2
InCludE (Include ICE), 16
incontinence
normal pressure hydrocephalus, 414–16
overactive bladder, 308–10
prostate disorders, 302
infections
childhood fever, 278–80
glandular fever, 282–4
immunisation schedule, 451
immunisation/vaccine preventable diseases, 452
Lyme disease, 274–6
pelvic infammatory disease, 492–4
pneumonia, 460–2
prostatitis, 306
risk afer splenectomy, 256
urinary tract, 270–2, 311
infammatory bowel disease (IBD), 186–8
infuenza immunisation, 451
informed consent, 527
inhalers
for asthma, 58
for COPD, 470
insect sting allergy, 54–6
insomnia
CBT, 510
weaning from sleeping tablets, 508–10
insulin, 360
intellectual disabilities, 386–8
annual health checks, 390–2
COCP request, 402–4
community resources, 400
defnition, 400
impact on family, 400
mental health, 398–400
register of, 392
intermenstrual bleeding, 492–4
interpersonal skills, 19–20, 25–6
intra-uterine devices (IUDs), 496–8
emergency contraception, 503
ipratropium, 466
iridotomy, iridoplasty, 156
iron defciency, 258–60
irritable bowel syndrome, 178–80, 318–19
J
jargon, 32
K
Kayser–Fleischer rings, 189
keratolytics, 102
ketones, 342
kidney disorders
acute kidney injury, 292–3
chronic kidney disease, 296–8
Henoch–Schönlein purpura, 264
Klinefelter’s syndrome, 215
knee examination, 538
knee pain, 368–70
weight reduction, 448–50
L
lactic acidosis, 342
laryngeal cancer, 141
laxative misuse, 336
learning disabilities see intellectual
disabilities
lef ventricular systolic dysfunction, 80
legal considerations, immunization, 434
levonorgestrel (LNG), 503
Lhermitte’s phenomenon, 428
linagliptin, 359
lipid-lowering therapy, 456
liraglutide, 360
liver disease, 189
genetic conditions, 214
lixisenatide, 360
long-acting reversible contraception (LARC),
496–8
long-term conditions
care plans, 442
cervical cancer, 232–4
chronic kidney disease, 296–8
COPD, 468–70
depression, 332–4
eczema, 112–14
heart failure, 78–80
hyperthyroidism, 352–4
infammatory bowel disease, 186–8
migraine, 418–20
psoriasis, 116–18
low back pain, 302, 364–6
lumbar spine examination, 537
lung cancer, 476–8
lymecycline, 104, 106
Lyme disease, 274–6
lymphadenopathy, diferential diagnosis, 284
M
malaria prophylaxis, 254
malignant neuroleptic syndrome, 324
➠ 555

-- 570 of 575 --

mammography, 454
management plans, 24
mandatory cases, 543–6
measles, 452
mebeverine, 178
medication compliance, 342
medroxyprogesterone acetate, 222
megaloblastic anaemia, 260
melasma, 108–10
memory disturbance, 414–16
meningitis B, 452
meningitis B immunisation, 451
menopause, 239
stopping contraception, 504
menstrual problems
heavy bleeding, 220–2
post-menopausal bleeding, 228–30
Mental Capacity Toolkit, BMA, 405
mental health
anxiety, 318–20
autism and transition problems, 394–5
depression, 322–4
eating disorders, 334–6
harmful drinking, 524–6
and intellectual disability, 398–400
opiate abuse, 520–2
personality disorder, 326–8
postnatal psychosis, 330–2
substance abuse, 508–10
mesenteric ischaemia, 172
metastatic cervical cancer, 232–4
metformin, 342
in PCOS, 226
and pregnancy, 358
migraine, 418–20
mindfulness, 324
mirabegron, 310
Mirena coil, 228–30, 498
in premature menopause, 239
miscarriage, thrombophilias, 213
missed pills, OCP, 490
MMR vaccination, 451
refusal, 432–4
mood changes
postnatal, 332
see also depression
Morton’s neuroma, 378
motivational interviews, 31, 522
multiple-problem consultations, 23, 90–2
multiple sclerosis (MS), 426–8
mumps, 452
Murphy’s sign, 172
muscular dystrophies, 214
myeloma, 250–2, 346
myocardial infarction (MI), 80, 172
N
naltrexone, 526
narcissistic personality disorder, 328
neck examination, 533–4
Neighbour consultation model, 8
neurological disorders
Bell’s palsy, 122–4
HACE, 288
Lyme disease, 276
multiple sclerosis, 426–8
normal pressure hydrocephalus, 414–16
neurological examination, 532
cranial nerves, 531
hands, 536
newborn infant screening, 454
norethisterone, 222
normal pressure hydrocephalus, 414–16
nuchal translucency, 196
NuvaRing, 490
O
obesity, 448–50
obsessive–compulsive personality disorder, 328
obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome, 472–4
occupational allergy, 66–8
oestrogen, vaginal application, 240
older adults
acute glaucoma, 154–6
acute kidney injury, 292–3
AMD and cataract, 158–60
angina, 90–2
atrial fbrillation, 82–4
change in bowel habit, 182–4
chronic kidney disease, 296–8
COPD, 468–70
DVT, 246–8
harmful drinking, 524–6
heart failure, 78–80
myeloma, 250–2
normal pressure hydrocephalus, 414–16
osteoporosis, 372–4
overactive bladder, 308–10
peripheral neuropathy, 410–12
pneumonia, 460–2
psoriasis, 116–18
skin lesion, 100–2
oligomenorrhoea, PCOS, 224–6
opiate abuse, 520–2
➠ 556

-- 571 of 575 --

oral cancer, 141
oral contraception, 490
benefts and risks, 490
girl < 16 years, 488–90
missed pills, 490
ORBIT-AF tool, 93
orlistat, 450
osteoarthritis, 361, 368–70
foot, 378
and weight loss, 448, 449
osteopenia, 374
osteoporosis, 372–4
risk in eating disorders, 336
otitis media, 126–8
ovarian cancer, 230
family history of, 208
ovarian cysts, 172, 242
PCOS, 224–6
overactive bladder, 308–10
oxybutynin, 310
oxygen
in acute COPD, 466
home therapy, 470
indications for, 76
P
Paget’s disease of bone, 346
pain
abdominal, 170–2
chest, 74–6, 90–2
endometriosis, 241
foot, 376–8
knee, 368–70
low back pain, 302, 364–6
migraine, 418–20
opiate abuse, 512–14
prostatitis, 304–6
shoulder, 380–2
painful arc, 382
palliative care, 232–4
pancreatitis, acute, 172
pansexuality, 502
paranoid personality disorder, 328
parathyroid hormone, raised levels, 344–6
parkinsonism, 532
paroxysmal AF, 86
Patau’s syndrome (trisomy 13), 215
patient information, accessibility, 160
PCV (pneumococcal) immunisation, 451
peak fow, asthma classifcation, 466
peanut allergy, 50–2
pelvic infammatory disease (PID), 172, 492–4
Pendleton consultation model, 7
peptic ulcer disease (PUD), 76, 172, 386–7
pericarditis, 76
peripheral iridectomy, 156
peripheral neuropathy, 410–12
peripheral vascular examination, 541
personality disorder, 326–8
pertussis, 452
pertussis immunisation, 451
Phalen’s test, 536
Pharmacy First scheme, 440, 442
pigmented skin lesions, 100–2
pilocarpine, 156
pioglitazone, 360
plantar fasciitis, 376–8
plasma glucose, targets in pregnancy, 358
pneumococcal infection, 452
pneumonia, 76, 460–2
pneumothorax, 76
polio, 452
polio immunisation, 451
polycystic kidney, 213
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), 224–6
post-menopausal bleeding, 228–30
postnatal depression, 332
postnatal psychosis, 330–2
prednisolone
in acute asthma, 466
in acute COPD, 466
in facial nerve palsy, 124
pregnancy
antenatal screening, 196, 454
diabetes, 356–8
melasma, 108–10
PCOS, 226
postnatal mood changes, 332
postnatal psychosis, 330–2
varicella, 62–4
premature menopause, 239
primary biliary cirrhosis, 189
primary sclerosing cholangitis, 189
progestogen-only pill (POP), 239
propranolol, 320
prostate
BPH, 313
prostatitis, 304–6
prostate cancer
management options, 313
symptoms, 302
prostate-specifc antigen (PSA) test, 300–2
counselling, 314
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), 176
psoriasis, 116–18
➠ 557

-- 572 of 575 --

psychological interventions
in anxiety, 320
in eating disorders, 336
puerperal psychosis, 330–2
pulmonary embolism (PE), 76
pyelonephritis, 172
Q
QRISK, 446
R
rashes
allergic contact dermatitis, 66–8
angioedema, 50–2
Henoch–Schönlein purpura, 262–4
see also skin lesions
RCA (Recorded Consultation Assessment), 34, 38–9
case complexity, 35–6
case selection, 35
mark scheme, 37
RCGP capabilities, 4–5
RCGP core statement, 3
RCGP curriculum, 3
recurrent UTI, 270–2
red eye, 165–6
red fags, 23, 36
acne, 106
bowel symptoms, 180
deafness, 132
dyspepsia, 176
headache, 420
heavy menstrual bleeding, 222
low back pain, 366
peripheral neuropathy, 412
snoring, 474
renal colic, 172
renal disorders see kidney disorders
reproductive and maternal health
cervical screening, 436–8
contraception - combined, 488–90
cystic fbrosis, 198–200
diabetes in pregnancy, 356–8
Down syndrome, 194–6
erectile dysfunction, 484–6
heavy menstrual bleeding, 220–2
LARC and sterilisation, 496–8
melasma, 108–10
pelvic infammatory disease, 492–4
polycystic ovary syndrome, 224–6
postnatal psychosis, 330–2
varicella in pregnancy, 62–4
resistant hypertension, 96
resitting the exam, 33
respiratory examination, 529
restrictive lung disease, 479
retinal detachment, 162–4
retinoids, 106
reversibility testing, 479
rheumatoid arthritis, 378
Rinne’s test, 132, 540
rotator cuf tendonitis, 382
rotavirus gastroenteritis, 452
rotavirus gastroenteritis immunisation, 451
rubella, 452
S
safeguarding
and alcohol, 512–14
domestic violence, 518
and intellectual disability, 404
and substance abuse, 522
salbutamol, 60, 466
sarcoidosis, 346
saxagliptin, 359
scalp psoriasis, 118
schizoid personality disorder, 328
schizotypal personality disorder, 328
sciatica, 364–6
scleritis, 166
screening programmes, 454
cervical screening, 436–8, 453
seborrhoeic dermatitis, 148
secondary amenorrhoea, 226
semaglutide, 360
sensorineural deafness, 130–2
serotonin syndrome, 324
Sever’s disease, 378
sexual health
contraception, 488–90, 496–8, 40204
emergency contraception, 503
erectile dysfunction, 302, 312, 484–6
gender dysphoria, 500–2
and intellectual disability, 402–4
pelvic infammatory disease, 492–4
sterilisation, 504
stopping contraception, 504
SGLT-2 inhibitors, 360
shingles vaccine, 451
shoulder anatomy, 382
shoulder examination, 534
shoulder pain, 380–2
sick day rule card, 294
sickle cell disease, 214
➠ 558

-- 573 of 575 --

signposting, 23
sildenafl, 312, 486
sinusitis, 134–6
sitagliptin, 359
skin lesions, 100–2
acne, 104–6
eczema, 112–14
features of concern, 102
melasma, 108–10
psoriasis, 116–18
see also rashes
sleep clinic referral, 474
sleep disturbance
obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome, 472–4
weaning from sleeping tablets, 508–10
sleeping tablets, weaning, 508–10
Sleep Station, 510
snoring, 472–4
SNRIs (serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors), 239
social prescribing, 152, 522
solar (actinic) keratosis, 102
sore throat, glandular fever, 284
spirometry, 479
asthma, 60
spironolactone, 80
in hypertension, 96
splenectomy, 254–6
squint, 150–2
SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors),
320
in premature menopause, 239
statins, 444–6, 456
sterilisation, 496–7, 504
steroids
in acute asthma, 466
in acute COPD, 466
Eumovate, 66
in facial nerve palsy, 124
nasal, 136
topical , 112–14, 116–18
strabismus, 150–2
stress fractures (march fractures), 378
stroke, 424
risk from HRT, 240
stroke risk management, atrial fbrillation,
93–4
subarachnoid haemorrhage, 420
subconjunctival haemorrhage, 166
substance abuse
harmful drinking, 512–14, 524–6
opiates, 520–2
services, 522
sulfonylureas, 359
SummarICE (Summarise ICE), 16
supraspinatus tear, 382
T
tadalafl, 486
in BPH, 313
in erectile dysfunction, 312
tamoxifen, drug interactions, 239
telephone consultations, 26, 27
temporal arteritis, 420
test results, 28
tetanus, 452
tetanus immunisation, 451
thalassaemia, 214
thrombophilias, 213
thyroid disorders, 346, 352–4
thyroiditis, 354
lumps and nodules, 141, 354
thyrotoxicosis, 346
thyroid examination, 533
time management, 22–3
Tinel’s test, 536
tinnitus, 130–2
‘tired all the time’, 348–50
tolbutamide, 359
tolterodine, 310
topical steroids
in eczema, 112–14
in psoriasis, 116–18
TP53, 208
tranexamic acid, 222
transgender issues, 500–2
transient ischaemic attack (TIA), 422–4
Transition Process Model, 396
transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP), 313
travel
afer splenectomy, 254–6
altitude sickness, 286–8
expedition medicines, 288
Trendelenburg test, 537
triglyceride levels, 456
trisomy 13 (Patau’s syndrome), 215
trisomy 18 (Edward’s syndrome), 215
trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), 194–6, 215
T score, 374
tubal occlusion, 504
tuberculosis immunisation, 451
tubular acidosis, 298
Turner’s syndrome, 215
two-level DVT Wells’ score, 248
type 2 diabetes, risk from HRT, 240
➠ 559

-- 574 of 575 --

U
ulcerative colitis (UC), 186–8
ulcerative keratosis, 166
ulipristal acetate (UPA), 503
unlicensed medicines, 288
urinary frequency, overactive bladder, 308–10
urinary tract infection (UTI)
in men, 311
recurrent, 270–2
urology, indication for referral, 311
V
vaccination see immunisation
vaginal dryness, 240
vaginal examination, indications for, 230
varicella in pregnancy, 62–4
varicose veins, 541
vasectomy, 496–7, 504
venom allergy, 54–6
venom immunotherapy, 56
venous thromboembolism (VTE)
anticoagulation, 265
risk from HRT, 240
suspected DVT, 246–8
thrombophilias, 213
verbal cues, 26
vertigo, BPPV, 138–40
vildagliptin, 359
vision
accessibility of information, 160
DVLA driving requirements, 160
see also eyes
vitamin B12 defciency, 260
vitamin D levels, 346
vitamin D supplementation, 374
vitamin K antagonists, 94
vulnerable patients, 29, 522
W
warfarin, 94
Weber’s test, 132, 540
weight gain
Cushing’s syndrome, 350
PCOS, 226
weight loss
2WW referral indications, 176, 184
eating disorders, 334–6
and change in bowel habit, 182–4
lung cancer, 476–8
myeloma, 252
weight reduction, 448–50
in PCOS, 226
well man check, 312
white coat hypertension, 96
Wilson’s disease, 214
wrists, examination, 536
X
X-linked dominant disorders, 214
X-linked recessive disorders, 214
Z
zopiclone, weaning, 508–10
➠ 560

-- 575 of 575 --

